Anthropology, Language, and Power: Cultural Analysis and Ethical Questions
Apr 29, 2026, 1:37 PM • 14 mins

SUMMARY KEYWORDS
anthropology, military ethics, cultural appropriation, language stratification, Gen Z language, mock Spanish, African American English, LGBTQ language, borrowing vs appropriation, American Anthropological Association

SPEAKERS
Speaker 1, Speaker 2, Speaker 3

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Speaker 1 • 00:01
This is what Americans are doing. Americans are beneficent. They're trying to spread democracy. Then he says, instead of reading resistance as inevitable resistance to foreign occupation, you start thinking of it as some kind of cultural miscommunication. And you start to ask naive, misshapen questions. You know, if we had only understood their culture better, how could we make them like us? Why do they hate us? They hate us, Gusterson says, because we're occupying their country, not because we don't understand the hand signals. And we must and how we treat their women. And so Hugh Gusterson has a really interesting point where he says, okay, are these actually the right questions to be asking? Is using social scientists to try to figure out hand signals, gender norms? Is that a way to deal with the situation that we have created in which we have untrained young Marines or not fully trained young Marines making life or death decisions around a population that is occupied, with whom they cannot communicate?

Speaker 1 • 01:18
Is the solution then, to try to understand their culture better? And this was a dominant position among critics of Michael Batia, Montgomery mcfate, Catherine Watts would say, okay, why don't we just try to make war less likely instead of trying to make it more humane? And Hugh Gusterson also says later in the documentary, and something that many anthropologists took up, including my friend who I have mentioned, again, military officer, also wrote a dissertation about hts, which he participated in for me personally. Hugh Gusterson says what I should do as an anthropologist of the military is ask questions about the culture within the national security state that enabled us to get into this mess in the first place. This is also a position that anthropologists should also be looking at what the military itself is doing, what the state itself is doing, and not just the Iraqi or Afghani local populations.

Speaker 1 • 02:20
And so we end this course with this documentary because I think it helps us ask really big questions. It help us. Helps us think about the origins of the discipline. Again, why so many anthropologists were so uncomfortable with this particular turn of events in the early two thousands, early to mid two thousands. And also big questions that I think we can think about across disciplines. What is knowledge for? For whom? What are we supposed to do with the things that we learn? And as anthropologists, why do we study how other people live or how we live? Right. Some anthropologists study how the people that they would identify themselves as coming from live. But why? And we see also this kind of discussion in the documentary itself. Is it braver or more ethical to, as Michael Matias says at one point, get your hands dirty Try to actually put out into the world in an applied way the things that you are learning and thinking about.

Speaker 1 • 03:40
That has a lot of risk. Michael Bautija was very much criticized, as was Montgomery mcfadden. Michael Lutia also died. Right. And so we have very big questions here the anthropologists are thinking about that are in relation to the origins of the discipline, but also are kind of just very big questions about why we study, why we learn, and what the end goal of this knowledge is and how it can properly be put to use. And I think in this case we have extremely smart people who make very good points on different sides of this debate. And although the kind of broad consensus at the end was that anthropologists should not be a moles, the American Anthropological association actually said this is not a good idea. There were still some very robust debates that were happening. Okay, let's move to a little bit of review. We're going to look at a few memes, a few videos, and just practice doing a little bit of cultural analysis together.

Speaker 1 • 05:00
Hopefully also you'll talk to the people around you and also tell me what you think. So we're going to start with. I showed this the last time I taught this class. We're going to start with something about language and about humor. So here we have a Gen Z Bible translation. While we watch it, I'd like you to think about our eternal question, right? Why is this funny? Why are people laughing? And also why does the preacher say that he has double checked the Bible and clarifies that he would never disrespect the word of God? Also he says this is Gen Z language. You are all Gen Z. Is this Gen Z language? What is it like listening to this?

Speaker 2 • 05:38
Okay, recently I did hear about a new translation out called the Gen Z Bible. Dishonor God's word. I have triple checked this to make sure this is exactly what Luke one communicates when the angels talks to Mary. Check this out. Mary was a pick me girl for God and was simping for him in prayer when the angel Gabriel appeared to her and said, hey yo, you're a real one and the top G is feeling you. But she thought his compliment was sus and gave him the side eye. So he said. So he said, baby girl, chill. God sent me to tell you you've passed his five check and low key. He wants you to have the main character. You name him Jesus and they will all say he's him. She said, how can this be since I promised him my body count will always be zero. Respectfully, he Said this ain't about cuffing season for the Holy Spirit will live rent free in you and your boy Jesus will be a divine bro.

Speaker 2 • 06:51
Beside your cousin Elizabeth is with child. She who is already older than a boomer and whose husband is way past beekeeping age. So Mary said, bet Gabriel left her on red and she let the Holy Spirit cook.

Speaker 1 • 07:09
Okay, is this Gen Z language to you? This is maybe like two years old now. Is this old to you now? No, it's not old. It still works. Is everything understandable to you? Okay, that's really interesting. Tells us something. We talked about it in our week on language. Language creates community, creates insiders and outsiders, as does humor. So Romana, to put you on the spot, did you understand all of this? Most of it. Ramona does. Most of it. I understand, like, I think most of it. Some words I have never heard before. This is again, the point that we've had, right, about language and community. It create insiders and outsiders. I'm kind of on the outside of this. Why does the preacher say that he has double checked the Bible and he wants everyone to know that he would never disrespect the word of God before he launches into this Gen Z retelling of, I guess technically the virgin birth when Mary became pregnant with Jesus, right?

Speaker 1 • 08:10
Divinely in the Christian narrative. Why does he say, I'm not going. I, I just want everyone to know I'm not going to disrespect the Bible. Yeah, That's a great point. Right? So here we see an example of language stratification, right? This is a kind of way of speaking that is quote unquote informal. It's in some ways removed from the center of power. It's also powerful. It has a lot of purchase. Oh my God, I wish that I could understand everything that this person is saying. Right? Some people, maybe people in your families have googled before Gen Z slang and they try to figure out some of the words that you use has a lot of cultural purchase, but it also is considered to be removed from the center of power. Right? So this is an example of language stratification. The pastor wants to say, okay, everybody, I just want you to know I'm not trying to disrespect the Bible by doing this thing, by using this way of speaking that is not the standard way of speaking that is marked.

Speaker 1 • 09:28
It's a very good example of that. Okay, let's do practice something else. Something that will almost certainly be on your final exam. Jane Hill's ideas about mock Spanish, about the Ideas that one has to have access to to make sense of a particular use of a quote unquote devalued dialect. Here we have mock Spanish. I don't know if you guys can see that. So we have Cinco de Drinko for may fifth, which is coming up. We also have down here, Cinco de Drinko. What ideas does one have to have access to, per Jane Hill, to make sense of this? Is it Cinco de Mayo is the normal term. Right. The fifth of May. A holiday, I believe. Mexican holiday. Right? Yeah. Cinco de drinko. Why drinko? Mock Spanish drink plus o at the end. Something Jane Hill says this is a pattern for mock Spanish. Right. She lays it out for us. She's a linguist. What idea does one have to have access to to make sense of this?

Speaker 1 • 10:46
Yeah, I remember. Absolutely. Excellent. So that the idea that Spanish speakers are somehow better able to let loose. Right. They're more plethora, they're better politicians, hard years. They have maybe a different relationship with alcohol. Yeah, That is right. The definition. Thank you for saying that. I'm just going to move as quickly to our next slide. We're going to come back to this slide. The difference between borrowing and appropriation. Right. This is the argument from Jane Hill, also argument from Liz La Car in regards to religion. Using something from a donor community to kind of prop up something about the host community, say something about themselves. I know how to party. I'm relaxed, I'm cosmopolitan. But if the donor community uses the same thing, uses the same language, or behaves in the way that they are supposedly predisposed to behave in, they are censured for it, they are punished for it.

Speaker 1 • 12:08
They may lose access to some particular resource because of it. This is the difference then, between appropriation and borrowing. Borrowing is when one can use something from a donor community as a host community, but when the donor community uses that resource as well, the donor community is not penalized for it. Does that make sense? Okay, very important points. Okay, great. What about Damn, girl. You find today the use of aae? What is the implicit idea? Yeah,

Speaker 3 • 12:48
I feel like in the same way that black English, probably in the same way that Spanish is used to give, like, a sense of levity and humor, which I suppose white Americans may consider lacking in their normal speech.

Speaker 1 • 13:06
Absolutely. Excellent. Excellent summary. So black English here is used to convey a certain type of levity. Also a kind of sexual sophistication. Right. Being really good at kind of hitting on people. What about this language here? LGBTQ language? Yas Queen. We assume that this man is a heterosexual, cisgendered man. So saying Yas queen, using that term, what does that. What does that do for him? Yeah, Super, super interesting point. So your colleagues pointing out how this particular use of language that comes from the LGBT community can suggest that one is, in your words, a safe space also.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Exploring Humor, Language, and Gender through Social Commentary and Poetry
Apr 27, 2026, 11:01 AM • 27 mins

SUMMARY KEYWORDS
humor, Key & Peele, naming conventions, language and power, cultural capital, linguistic discrimination, gender norms, Robin Lakoff, uptalk, credibility, Bedouin poetry, Lila Abu-Lughod, indirect expression, social hierarchy, Pierre Bourdieu

SPEAKERS
Speaker 1, Speaker 2, Speaker 3

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Speaker 1 • 00:00
The lack of ascendancy is justified. So I want to take a moment to think about this and also to think with you again about what we started talking about last week, which is why things are funny. How humor gives us information about our society. We're going to watch another Key and Peel skit. Substitute teacher. How many people have been.

Speaker 2 • 00:21
This one.

Speaker 1 • 00:23
Okay, great. We're going to watch it.

Speaker 2 • 00:37
All right, listen up, y'.

Speaker 1 • 00:38
All.

Speaker 2 • 00:38
I'm your substitute teacher, mister Garvey. I taught school for twenty years in the inner city, so don't even think about messing with me. Y' all feel me? Take a role here. J. Qualen. Where's J. Qualen at? No J. Qualen here? Yeah.

Speaker 1 • 01:05
Do you mean Jacqueline?

Speaker 2 • 01:07
Okay, so that's how it's gonna be. Y' all wanna explain? Okay, man. I've got my eye on you.

Speaker 1 • 01:14
Jay.

Speaker 2 • 01:14
Quelin. Balake. Where is Balake at? No Balaki here today. Yes, sir. My name is Blake. Are you out of your goddamn mind, Blake? What? Do you want to go to war, Balaki? No. Cause we could go to war. No, I'm for real. I'm for real, so you better check yourself. D. Nice. Is there a D? Nice? If one of y' all says some silly ass name, this whole class is gonna feel my wrath.

Speaker 1 • 02:04
Now.

Speaker 2 • 02:05
D. Nice.

Speaker 1 • 02:06
You mean Denise.

Speaker 2 • 02:07
Sonda, you say your name right. Right now.

Speaker 1 • 02:12
Denise.

Speaker 2 • 02:13
Say it right.

Speaker 1 • 02:14
Denise. Denise. Denise. Denise.

Speaker 2 • 02:17
That's better. Thank you. Now, a A Ron, where are you? Where is a A Ron right now? No A A Ron, huh? But you better be sick, dead or mute.

Speaker 3 • 02:34
A A Ron.

Speaker 2 • 02:38
Why didn't you ask me the first time I said that, huh? I'm just, you know, I'm just asking you. I said it, like, four times. So why didn't you say it the first time I said A, A Ron?

Speaker 1 • 02:49
Because it's pronounced Aaron.

Speaker 2 • 02:51
Son of. You got messed up. Aaron. Ron. Now take your ass on down to Osha Hennessy's office right now and tell him exactly what you did. O. Hennessy.

Speaker 1 • 03:07
Principal o', Shaughnessy.

Speaker 2 • 03:08
Get out of my goddamn classroom before I break my foot off in your ass. Insubordinate and churlish. Timothy. Present. Thank you.

Speaker 1 • 03:28
Okay, so there we see Kegel, Mike and Key performing. Right? The Key. The role of the substitute teacher. Okay, so why is this skit funny? I've often used this skit in classes, and people will regularly say this skit is funny because kegelmike and Key doesn't know how to pronounce the student's name. And I want to think with you about that, if that is actually why this skit is funny. So we have some reactions here on one of the videos, and I want to draw your attention other than when you realize you've better at names than the Starbucks people. To this one, I absolutely love how subtitles and names of the students are read correctly. But I want us to think about today. What is the correct way to pronounce this name? And how do you know? And also, we have here a substitute teacher who says this is relatable. Some high school kids these days have really weird names.

Speaker 1 • 04:36
I have no idea how to pronounce. But what are weird names? And how does the substitute teacher know to pronounce. Know how to pronounce some names. And so is the joke of this video really that mister Garvey, the substitute teacher played by Ken KE KE Michael Key, is mispronouncing names? Okay, how do we pronounce? We're going to play a game now. How do we pronounce this name? The principal's o'. Shaughnessy. Okay. How do you know that it's pronounced o'? Shaughnessy?

Speaker 3 • 05:16
Yeah, but by convention.

Speaker 1 • 05:19
By convention. I mean, even.

Speaker 3 • 05:21
Even though, like, it's an Irish name.

Speaker 1 • 05:23
It's an Irish name. What'd you say?

Speaker 3 • 05:28
Like, we become used to how they work. There was a guy at my school, my high school, who was pronounced S E, a N. But you heard Sean, because in Irish, S E a N.

Speaker 1 • 05:40
That's a great example. Sean. Right. There's not an sh. That's a wonderful example. So I've lived in Boston for a very long time. It took me a long time to figure out how to pronounce these places. Does anyone know how to pronounce this place? These are all cities around Boston. Who said it? How do you pronounce this? First one? Worcester. How many people would say Worcester like I did for maybe ten years? Okay. Yep. Worcester. What about this? How do we pronounce this one?

Speaker 3 • 06:07
Cambridge.

Speaker 1 • 06:08
Cambridge. Not Cambridge. Cambridge. What about this one?

Speaker 2 • 06:14
Gloucester. Gloucester.

Speaker 1 • 06:16
Yeah. Gloucester. Is it Gloucester or Gloucester?

Speaker 3 • 06:21
Gloucester.

Speaker 1 • 06:21
Gloucester. Okay. It's like maybe I've been saying it wrong. Also Gloucester for many years. This is me. Gloucester. Who would know? How would I know? I didn't grow up here. Let's look at some other examples. Okay, how do we pronounce this word at the top over here? Okay. What about the next one?

Speaker 3 • 06:40
Cough.

Speaker 1 • 06:41
Next one?

Speaker 3 • 06:42
Mortgage.

Speaker 1 • 06:43
Mortgage.

Speaker 3 • 06:44
What is it?

Speaker 1 • 06:45
This one? Present or present or present? This one?

Speaker 3 • 06:51
Wound.

Speaker 1 • 06:51
Wound or wound. This one?

Speaker 3 • 06:54
Tear.

Speaker 1 • 06:54
Tear. Tear. Absolutely why don't we pronounce the gh? Why don't we pronounce the T? Why don't we say Wendy's Day? All of these are conventions, right? We learn how to pronounce these words, and we also learn the difference between present and present, wound and wound, tear and tear. Just like we learned that this is Jacqueline, not Jaquelin, Aaron, not Aaron, Blake, not Bilake. And so what is the joke in substitute teacher? I would propose you that it is not that mister Garvey is pronouncing the students names incorrectly, or really that that is the full joke. Rather, as social theorists, we can use a term that we've now seen. Actually, a lot of times we saw this with Susan Paul's. We've also seen it with Muzahiti. This skit is a temporary right of reversal, right? In which white students names are mispronounced temporarily and their names are.

Speaker 1 • 08:12
The fact the way that their names are written is revealed to be through this skit, not necessarily somehow more logical. That is quite logical to pronounce them the way that mister Garvey does. And so we see a de centering of white meats. It is also a piece like everything that Jordan Peele and Keto Michael Key did together as a comedy do. It is a piece of social commentary, right? It shows that typical white names are just as illogical as any other name, but that many viewers will know how to pronounce these names because they are names that have been at the center of the public sphere of the world, perhaps that at least many of these viewers have lived in. And so we see here a number of ideas. We see that language is part of one's cultural capital. One learns it, and it also places one in a social hierarchy. So often, if one speaks a devalue dialect, learning other languages is a means of accessing incentive power, of moving among kind of different segments of this circle from the margins to the center.

Speaker 1 • 09:36
And we also see that marginalized languages can be marginalized, not because they are inferior or illogical, irrational. This is something that linguistic anthropologists reject. And Louis CK Showed us this. Louis CK Couldn't speak black English because he never learned it. But often these languages may be marked because they are attached to marginalized groups, groups removed from the center of power. Okay, for the rest of our conversations today, we're going to talk about gender. We're going to talk about Laila, Abu Lugud's classic piece on poetry, and we're going to think about it in relation to our own lives. So I'm just going to give you a brief introduction to how anthropologists have thought about language and gender. And they thought about language in the same way that they thought about many other tools that Homo sapiens use.

Speaker 1 • 10:34
And also the way that they have thought, as we talked about in our weeks on identity. They think about language as both structuring and as a means of self expression that can be transformative, as both a constraint and a way that one performs oneself in the world. This is just like habitus, right? Language as an aspect of habitus, as Pierre Bourdieu gave us, kind of set of structures that are given to us and they are limited, but through which we make ourselves visible to other people and to ourselves, and potentially also change, though always with the risk of failure, how other people see us and how we see ourselves. Robin Lakoff is a kind of famous linguistic anthropologist who wrote quite a bit about language and gender at the end of the twentieth century. I'll share with you a few ideas of hers that are rather interesting. She talks about language discrimination.

Speaker 1 • 11:36
She's especially interested in women, but this could certainly apply to other groups. She says women experience linguistic discrimination two ways, in the ways that they are taught to use language, and also in the way that general language use treats them. I'll show you an example of this, something that you may notice in your own speech. Very simple example, which is that often girls, the term girl or girls is used for women of all ages, yet the term boy not used for men of all ages. Actually guy or guys often used for men past adolescence. And so it becomes possible to refer to a woman who is an adult as girl, but not a man who is an adult as boy. And we also see very interesting differences in terms of the treatment of adult men and adult women as they age. You can see this little asterisk here. Fred hopes to meet an eligible spinster. Linguistic anthropologists do this.

Speaker 1 • 12:48
They put an asterisk next to a sentence that is nonsensical. And they say when a sentence is nonsensical, it tells us something about the society that is using that particular sentence in which that sentence cannot make sense. It does make sense to say Mary hopes to meet an eligible bachelor, but not Fred hopes to meet an eligible spinster. Eligible spinster doesn't work. Why doesn't it work? Both of them are unmarried. It reminds us that right there are certain unspoken societal norms. This is what Robin Lakoff would say in which women need men, but men don't necessarily need women in the same way. It would be Interesting to know whether this still works for your generation and maybe permutations of how perhaps it would not work or other words that you might use. Lakoff was writing in the late twentieth century, but this is how linguistic anthropologists think.

Speaker 1 • 13:40
What sentences make sense, what sentences become incomprehensible, paradoxical? And what does that tell us? I'm going to show you just the beginning. Before we shift to Abu Lagood in our final conversation, I'm going to show you a video from a communication coach about something called uptalk. Uptalk is a way of speaking in which a voice ends at the end of a sentence with a rising intonation. We're going to watch just a little bit of this video and she's going to explain it to us.

Speaker 3 • 14:18
Children will not be judged by the color of their skin or by the content of their character. Come on. That's not the way Martin Luther King junior Said it. And if he did say it that way, nobody's going to listen. Let's talk about Up Talk. Hello, friends. I'm Alex Lang, and communication coach is here to help you increase your impact, to lead your teams with more excellence. And you're not going to be leading your teams to more excellence. Uptalk. Uptalk is simply the sound of a voice going up at the end of a sentence or a thought instead of down where a period would be. This is a relatively controversial topic. On one side of the argument, people are saying, hey, uptalk is just a way to prevent someone from interrupting. If my tone goes up, it shows that I'm not done yet and I get to keep talking. Other people say it's invitational. It allows for that back and forth sound in any conversation.

Speaker 3 • 15:15
And others say, hey, it's just a way to check in to sound a little bit more tentative to see if people are following you. Now, on the other side of the argument, people say it's a bad habit that is hurting your credibility. One thing is certain, however. It is not gender specific. It's not something that only women do. There was a recent study by Reichardt and Arviniti that showed that even though women certainly do a little bit of uptalk, so do men, in either case, women. It creates mostly a bad impression. An Australian study showed that eighty five percent of managers thought that it made their people sound insecure and unsure of themselves.

Speaker 1 • 15:53
Okay, so we're going to stop there. You can see from the wild, right in the wild. A really interesting example of this conversation about devalued ways of speaking and also particular ways of speaking is attached to gender. Alex Lyons says, you know, men also uptalk. Very, very interesting. Managers say that it makes people seem insecure. Interesting study is an aside done on Jeopardy. In which men use uptalk to signal uncertainty. And so they were more likely actually to answer incorrectly when using uptalk, whereas women used uptalk to apologize for success. Whether or not this is still the case. Quite interesting, right? Societies may shift, but this is a very interesting example of a devalued way of speaking that is associated with a particular gender, though not exclusively. And also how in the wild, communication coaches may try to encourage people not to speak this way.

Speaker 1 • 16:51
Okay, so we're going to finish today by talking about Lailah Abu Lugod and this very interesting piece about the Awlad Ali in northern Egypt. So a Bedouin, a nomadic Bedouin group. And we're looking specifically at their use of poetry. So this is a group that kind of travels with their animals looking for different pastures where the animals can graze and they move in family groups. And so Laila Abu Lugur is specifically studying Bedouin women's speech among the Auled Ali. Why is this, as she tells us elsewhere in her book, which is called Failed Sentiments, it was a question of access. She did interview men, but she had much greater access to the sphere of women. And she tells us a few things in the excerpt that we read for today. She tells us that women generally do not speak particularly openly. This is in the nineteen seventies and nineteen eighties, during the time of her fieldwork, do not speak particularly openly about sexual desire.

Speaker 1 • 18:03
She also says that men do not either, something that may be familiar to many of you. This is, this is true of many different cultures, societies across the world. But specifically, she says women actually often vigorously deny that they have any sexual interest in other men, including in men to whom they are married, to the man to whom we are married. And she says this is because there's a strong attachment between sexual modesty and class propriety. Also probably something true of the society that we are currently living in. And she also says that women do not really readily speak about the pain resulting from kind of a failed attachment, more the grief experienced by divorce or by a husband who may take a second wife. And so she tells us a lot about the family structure. In the very short excerpt that you read for today, the ten page excerpt, she tells us about the family structures.

Speaker 1 • 19:03
So we know that this is a nomadic group and we know that it also is a group in which polygyny. What is polygyny?

Speaker 3 • 19:12
Yeah, multiple wives.

Speaker 1 • 19:14
One man, multiple wives. Right. This is. Remember this for your final exam. So certainly be on the final exam. Right. Polygyny. One man, multiple wives. We know that polygyny is on the rise. There's increased wealth. There's migration of some of the men elsewhere for work. So a reduced number of men. We have more frequent polygyny at the time of her research. And so Abu Logid is especially interested in women's poetry called. We're going to listen to an example of this is from a man. But I just want you to hear what this sounds like. It's from Jordan.

Speaker 2 • 20:48
Okay.

Speaker 1 • 20:48
So we hear there what this kind of poetry, recited poetry sounds like. So this is what Abu Logod is writing about in this particular chapter. Okay. What is her overarching argument about the Rinewa? What does she say that the Rinewa do? Yeah, Absolutely perfect summary. It allows the Awlad Ali women to express emotions that they otherwise perhaps could not express. And she says it also does something for the listeners. It allows them to recognize the feelings that the reciter is expressing in a socially acceptable way. So reciter doesn't say, I'm very sad that my husband has taken a second wife. I'm sad that this person that I thought I was going to marry, I can't marry my family had said no. Instead, she recites a poem about it. And the other people may recite some of the poem with her if it is a poem that they know. And they may express compassion or understanding to her as she recites this poem.

Speaker 1 • 22:10
And so what kind of emotions do the Rinnewa dwell in? Love and attachment, yearning, longing, betrayal, hurt at the betrayal, and the trials encountered in polygyny. And so for the final few minutes of class, I'd like you to think about parallels from your own lives or from the place where we are right now. I'm going to show you some examples from my life. So some examples from the wild. This is from a cousin of mine, some Facebook posts that she made. People have to pretend you're a bad person so they don't feel guilty about the things they did to you. God forbid they be accountable for their bullshit. No matter how much you beg a narcissist to stop, they will push you past your limits until you snap. Kids will always remember who showed up. What is my cousin? Distant cousin. What is my cousin doing here? Yeah,

Speaker 3 • 23:07
like voicing a particular response without, you know, necessarily addressing a particular situation.

Speaker 1 • 23:14
Absolutely. She is reposting the words of others. She's using the words of others. Just like poetry. Just like the in Some cases, right, to express hurt that in her case her husband had left and he was not being a responsible father to their children, to their shared children. And so this is a way, right, that we can see the voicing of particular experiences indirectly. I'm going to show you some other examples that are a little bit more fun. Just going to watch. We'll watch this One. Night is yours alone.

Speaker 2 • 24:33
Sure you had enough? Everybody hurts

Speaker 1 • 25:09
sometimes. Okay? So a very good example, very famous

Speaker 3 • 25:20
song,

Speaker 1 • 25:23
of how satisfying it can feel. To listen to a really sad song when maybe you are feeling sad, listen to it with other people who maybe also feel sad. You don't have to say that you're feeling sad and you don't have to say why you're feeling sad. But it can feel incredibly satisfying. So I'll show you another example,

Speaker 3 • 26:18
Another

Speaker 1 • 26:18
example of a song, popular song, maybe three years ago now. Very satisfying to listen to it, maybe to sing. If you're feeling really mad about something, you're feeling upset with someone, you might have sung the song with some friends, friend who got divorced, loved this song, sang it all the time. Okay, so what can we say in songs that perhaps we can't say in everyday life? What can the women, the Bedouin women of the Ablaze aglie in the late nineteen seventies, nineteen eighties say in songs or in poetry in Rinwa that they can't say in real life? Yeah, some rude words. That's true. That's so true. Rude words. That's a great point. Actually, you can say rude words in a song. Kids have an alibi. Maybe you wouldn't say those rude words in your normal life. That's a great point. Right. If ever, as a child you sang a song that had quote, unquote, rude words.

Speaker 1 • 27:15
Right. Bad words. It's just a song. I'm just singing a song. Right. And so we have these really big questions that Abu Lubud is helping us think about. What does language do in our everyday lives? Is it a mirror of an internal self? Or does it do something for us that helps us manage our existence in unexpected ways? For Wednesday, please watch the documentary signed on blackboard and comes prepared with questions. We'll discuss the semester then. I look forward to seeing you have a great final week.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Transformative Power of Comedy: Subversion, Community, and Perspective in Humor
Apr 22, 2026, 11:00 AM • 32 mins

SUMMARY KEYWORDS
comedy, laughter, ambiguity, incongruity, transgression, catharsis, regulatory discourse, Muslim comedy, stereotypes, ritual of reversal, community, marginalized groups, subversion, Judah Friedlander, Mo Amer, British Muslim comedy, Susan Falls, center and periphery, social solidarity, transformative potential

SPEAKERS
Speaker 1, Speaker 2

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Speaker 1 • 00:01
And Bellci has a very interesting overview of how scholars have thought about why people laugh, what comedy does, And I've outlined it for you a little bit here, and then we're going to look at some examples and practice a little bit of analysis. So first, Baleeji tells us that scholars of comedy say that people often laugh when dealing or facing ambiguity or incongruity. Beleji says this is why often when you are shocked, you laugh. You may have had this experience before where you laugh at something and then someone says, why did you laugh? It's not funny. You say, well, it's not that it's funny, it's that I was surprised, right? And so scholars of humor often look at laughter as an indication that one has encountered two things coming together that don't necessarily also talk about laughter. This comes particularly from ancient philosophy as indexing a relationship of superiority and inferiority, in the sense that laughing at one's inferiors is much less risky.

Speaker 1 • 01:26
But also, Baliji says this is why laughter is pleasurable, because it is also transgressive. Sometimes, particularly in a comedy show, one might find oneself laughing at things that one, quote, unquote, is not supposed to laugh at, and that can be incredibly pleasurable in its transgression. Belligi also says that laughter is a reaction to recognizing an uncomfortable truth. And this is something that he says we often see in comedy, including in the Muslim comedy that he's interested in. There's someone, the comic, who says something out loud that is not normally said aloud. And Bellagi says this constitutes a kind of catharsis, in a similar way that Bagligi says scholars talk about humor as a kind of safety valve, a safe release of aggression against power. Also very similar to what Susan Falls is looking at, right? The play with what we could call racial slurs against poor whites, right?

Speaker 1 • 02:42
Like white trash. Those slurs used in playful and subversive ways as a kind of means of reclaiming and also releasing aggression or anger for the participants in the demolition derby. We also hear about humor as a kind of anti structure. We'll look specifically at a quote from Baliji about this anti structure, very similar to another term that you have heard, anti, right, or ritual of reversal, a moment in which the world is turned upside down, which is also very similar to the role of humor as a safety valve, a moment in which the world, as it is, is temporarily suspended, and the kind of pleasure that can come from that. Scholars are also interested in how humor is a means of saying aloud things that one is normally not allowed to say aloud, but that one wants to practice singing aloud. And so a kind of dress rehearsal for rebellion with the possibility of disavowal.

Speaker 1 • 04:05
And we can see this in quotidian ways in our lives. If anyone has ever said something to you or you have ever said something to someone and they've gotten upset with you, you might say, I'm just kidding. It was just a joke. I didn't mean it seriously. Because humor also offers that possibility of disavowal. And finally, scholars of humor, and we hear about this from Baliji, we'll look at some quotes where he talks about this. Humor creates community. Specifically, it creates a feeling of being on the inside. You have ever been at a comedy show and the comic has told a joke and everyone laughs and you don't get it. Not a great feeling. You're on the outside, right? But you can see this also in your everyday life. If there is a joke that some friends share that you don't understand or don't participate in, that is also a moment in which community is being created.

Speaker 1 • 05:04
And also people are being excised from that community, from that inner circle. And so scholars are also interested in the role of laughter in creating feelings of social solidarity. So Belichi is especially interested, right, as we said at the beginning, in Muslim comedy and specifically in Muslim comedy in the decade following september eleventh. And so what does he say specifically Muslim comedy does in the contemporary United States in the two thousands? He says a few things. He says, first, comedy constructs a counterworld to the world of ordinary life. And therefore, in Muslim comedy, the Muslim, an oddity in American life in the decade following nine, eleven, becomes funny. When he appears ordinary. It is an electrifying anti right in which the world is turned upside down for the moment, for a moment. And the audience, sometimes a Muslim audience, but often a mixed audience, and sometimes a majority non Muslim audience, sees the world from the other side, from the perspective of the Muslim comedian.

Speaker 1 • 06:27
And Belichi kind of believes in the transformative potential of this comedy.

Speaker 2 • 06:33
He.

Speaker 1 • 06:33
He says, through this comedy, stereotypes are named, and they are also emptied of some of their weight. And a new vision is asserted. The comic positions himself, in fact, as ordinary. And this, of course, should sound very familiar. So something that we have already seen, the kind of comedy we want to call it that that happens in the demolition derby is also a play in which the order of the world is temporarily turned upside down. And also participants make use of objects that they often participate in, building cars, but that they frequently, with their salaries, cannot buy new and so we see something similar in which the world as it is is temporarily suspended in a playful way in which terms used to deride participants, poor whites are given to cars, which are then destroyed and Belligerent Says humor or comedy is a particularly important tool for marginalized groups, for the groups that live on the kind of periphery of human society.

Speaker 1 • 08:06
Comedy, Baleji argues, right. And he seems to believe in this, transforms the world as it is. It is a means of undoing otherness. Humor, he says on the first page of his article, usually stands humanity. If someone has sense of humor, then he is just like us. He is likable. And so Belliger says, this is actually why we see some of the most famous comics, for example, in American history, that the most famous comics have been from marginal groups. The stranger, Belligeri says, represents this ability to be both near and far and to be able to stay attached to the mainstream vision and withdraw back to the ethnic or to their own personal marginalized groups vision. And Belichi also says here he is quoting a rabbi who did a Jewish comic, who did a joint show with a Muslim comic. And afterwards the rabbi said, you can't hate the person you laughed with.

Speaker 1 • 09:17
And so Bagi says shared laughter is also transformative. We're going to watch some videos today, and I want to think with you about what Baleggi brings to the table, the arguments that he makes specifically about the transformative role of humor and why things are funny. And one of the arguments that Balegi gives us is that, as we said earlier, right, comedy often names a commonsensical truth and plays with it, violates it, shows the holes in it. Again, it's a moment where the world as it is is identified and then flipped. And this is often done by playing with what social theorists would call a regulatory discourse, otherwise, a kind of commonsensible truth, something that many of us do not see until someone violates that truth. So we're going to watch the first of a few comedy clips today. This is from Judah Friedlander, Jewish comic. Also, historically, in the contemporary United States, some of the most famous comics of the twentieth century, for instance, were Jewish.

Speaker 1 • 10:36
Judah Friedlander is playing with a regulatory discourse. He's playing with actually a few of them. We're going to focus on one of them, but I'd like to show you this brief clip. This is from a trailer for, I think, his comedy special.

Speaker 2 • 10:55
Any questions about my presidential platform for twenty seventeen health care. We don't need it. We're Americans, who's probably Europeans need it because they're genetically inferior and they have no. Climate change. I am for climate change. I don't want the same weather every day. That's cashew. When I'm president, I'm not even gonna have a first lady because I think ranking women is sexist racism. Where do you stand? For it or against it? A lot of undecided. Racism, big problem. But we're still number one at it. Any other questions about my presidential platform? Any other issues? I think if Jesus had been American and had a gun, he'd still be alive today. Try to nail onto the cross. He'd be like, not so fast, you pieces of shit. Jesus, America was victory.

Speaker 1 • 12:22
Okay, so this is just a clip from Judah Friedlander's the trailer for his comedy special. He's playing with many, many regulatory discourses here. Right. He's seen aloud many things that are not supposed to be said aloud. Specifically, he's performing in this clip in New York City. You can see that the crowd is very keyed into him. And when he says things that are surprising or unexpected, people laugh. What regulatory discourses is he playing with? Ten forty. Why don't we take a moment, say hi to the people around you, and I'm interested in hearing from you. What regulatory discourse did you notice him playing with? Regulatory discourse being a commonsensical truth. Please do say hi to the people around you and talk to them. And also circulate. Oregon racism. Absolutely.

Speaker 2 • 14:16
He turned Jesus into a violent man.

Speaker 1 • 15:02
Okay, very interesting. So I heard some regulatory discourses. Climate change, sexism, racism. Any other ones? Yeah.

Speaker 2 • 15:22
They turned Jesus into a violent man.

Speaker 1 • 15:25
They turned Jesus into a violent man. Absolutely. Yes. In this kind of play on gun control, which someone else at the back mentions. Absolutely. Yeah.

Speaker 2 • 15:50
It also happening with online political kind of things, like people will catch other chances of people's very strange problems and talking again, again, to give the people discount. Or the middle, some type of emotional value.

Speaker 1 • 16:16
Yeah, this is a great point. So your colleague is pointing out how these are actually very serious issues. Right. People care a lot about these issues. They're often considered to be moral issues. Right. Moral or ethical issues. And Judah Friedlander is treating them with an intentional unseriousness. Right. Which also results in kind of the laughter of surprise. I would also propose to you that he's playing with America is the greatest country in the United States. He's also playing with stereotypes about Americans. And he's playing with a contemporary American regulatory discourse, which is the claim that the United States is the greatest country in the world. This is also something that he is identifying and trying to play with in a way that is surprising and pleasurable to the people who are attending his comedy show. He doesn't name it, though, Right.

Speaker 1 • 17:25
But he gestures to it. Americans don't need health care. We're strong. Europeans need it because they are genetically inferior, et cetera. One of the questions that Susan Falls asks about the demolition derby and that scholars of humor ask about comedy is whether this kind of play with regulatory discourses is subversive. Is it transformative? Does it change people's minds or relationship with the regulatory discourse? Or does it reinforce it? And Susan Falls. Susan Falls was not very optimistic about this in relation to specifically the use of racial slurs used against poor whites for the cars that they destroyed in the demolition derby. She said the transformation of these slurs into winks, into a kind of means of poking fun for poor whites at themselves, at their own subordinate whiteness. She called it ambiguous and risky and said it could work, but it could also very well fail.

Speaker 1 • 18:51
And this is also something that is true in comedy. If you've ever been to a comedy show where no one laughs at a joke, it's really hard. If you have ever told a joke and no one has laughed or no one has understood. Right. Humor itself is an attempt to play with the world as it is and try to make it temporarily different or try to show it for what it is in a probably ironic way. And sometimes it works, and sometimes it falls flat. And this is something that Falls is much more concerned about. Okay, we're going to watch a few more videos, and I want to think with you about Baleggi's argument. Bale, again, is pretty optimistic about what humor and comedy can do specifically for Muslim Americans in the decade following september eleventh. Right. He says through comedy, the majority American population, which is not Muslim, temporarily sees the world through the eyes of a Muslim protagonist who suddenly becomes ordinary.

Speaker 1 • 20:05
And this ritual of reversal, this moment in which the world as it is, is turned upside down, has transformative potential. Stereotypes can be named and emptied of their significance and also the way that the world is structured so that particular people, Muslims, are not at its center. That structure is suddenly laid bare and also open to contestation and change. So we're gonna watch the trailer for Mo. How many people have seen Mo on Netflix? Interesting. Okay. Really good show. Mo Amer, I think is his name. Is that his name? Mo Amer, Big Mo Amer, comedian, kind of semi autobiographical show that he made. And I'd like you to think about while we watch this, what Bi would tell us about what a show like this, which is a kind of comedy drama, what it does for Muslims in the contemporary United States. Okay.

Speaker 2 • 21:17
Mo.

Speaker 1 • 21:17
Hi.

Speaker 2 • 21:18
Salai. No, no, we don't have to do.

Speaker 1 • 21:22
Leave your shoes on.

Speaker 2 • 21:23
No, it's gross. Well, come on in. Yeah, I'm just riding in the ch. How you doing, brother? Let me show you something. You need to sell that crap. Selling merch is the only thing I can do without papers. I need to support my family. Petrol Motion. It's my last one. My last one. Last one. Islam is real practical. Guitar God.

Speaker 1 • 21:51
You should go to church with me someday.

Speaker 2 • 21:53
What is the Trinity, though? Please explain it to me. She really loves your hair.

Speaker 1 • 22:08
Thank you.

Speaker 2 • 22:09
She wants you to take your shoes off, but she wishes you were in polit.

Speaker 1 • 22:12
Joking.

Speaker 2 • 22:15
A lot of jokes. I've never been to Palestine. I don't have citizenship there. I don't have citizenship here. I'm like a refugee free agent.

Speaker 1 • 22:27
Would you like to try some chocolate hummus?

Speaker 2 • 22:29
You said chocolate hummus. You just insulted my grandmother.

Speaker 1 • 22:32
O siento. I did not know that hummus was Mexican. You keep thinking that you have to do all this stuff alone, and you don't. You got us and you got your family. Who the hell are you?

Speaker 2 • 22:45
Take them to court. Where I come from, Olivet is a huge problem. Now, where's that? Palestine. Damn. That's a couple hours away. No, not Palestine. Texas. Oh, it's Jalome. Yeah, It's a real braining issue.

Speaker 1 • 23:12
Okay, so we have this trailer for a show about Mo, who is Palestinian American, lives in Texas. What would B say about this particular show? What story is it telling? Yeah.

Speaker 2 • 23:35
That, For example, some people will think that the.

Speaker 1 • 24:02
That's true. Yeah. Excellent. So we see how much Mo is kind of living in between the center and the periphery of contemporary American society. Right. We see that he has a Catholic girlfriend. We see that he doesn't, however, have papers. He doesn't have a passport. We see that he's selling merch out of his car and he's unable to have, like, a steady job. We also see that he's working at some point in a strip club. We see Mo Beligi would say, as someone who is moving between the center and the periphery. And he's giving other Americans who are living mostly at the center. Not all of them, of course, right at the center, but closer to the center. He's giving them a view from his particular position on the periphery. And he is also naming some of the stereotypes about contemporary Muslims and emptying them of their meaning. He's kind of an ordinary guy, right?

Speaker 1 • 25:15
He's working at a strip club. He's also praying. He's living kind of a series of paradoxes, much in the way that all of us live. A series of paradoxes. If any of you have ever heard of this, the Little Mosque on the Prairie. Not going to watch it today, but it's a Canadian show. It ran for several years. And it similarly does this thing that Baliji says Muslim comedy can do, which is depict Muslims as ordinary. And in depicting them as ordinary, transforming their position in terms of the center and periphery relationship, moving them a little bit away from the margins. Okay, we're going to finish by watching this Muslim skit. So this is a skit done by a British Muslim comedy troupe. It's from twenty nineteen and it's a take on what Baliji calls flying while Muslim. He talks a lot about flying while Muslim. In the wake of nine eleven, he calls it a public event.

Speaker 1 • 26:23
He says lots of comics in the United States talk about it. So I'd like us to watch this and then think with baleege how Baliji would analyze this. He doesn't analyze this in his article, but I'd like us to analyze it together. So really funny and smart gift.

Speaker 2 • 26:47
The lamp was in there before. The lamp, bro. That's the one. And they changed the page still. Have you two been in here before? What is the purpose of your visit to Marrakesh? Basically, one of our boys is getting married and we're going to Marrakesh. Should we stack? Do. But obviously we keep it halal. Hashtag halal, bro. Can you both please remove your shoes? Already done it. I'll just. Shoes, bro. Come on. It's not just that, is it? Laptops, belts, folds. Oh, chewing gum. Have you ever had any trouble with the police? Not really buying it, bro. What's your name? Toby. Do me a favor. Yeah. When you say that, just say it with a bit more aggression so we get a little bit scared, you know what I mean? Yeah. Like with good posture and that. Have you had any trouble with the police? Like that? Like, do you have suspicious items in your bag? Do you have any links with terrorism?

Speaker 2 • 27:41
Do you know how to make a bomb? Do you know my system? To save you some time, I got a PDF copy with all the answers on my phone. I can just send it to you right now if you want. Or I got a printing copy. Which one do you want? I don't know. Right. I mean, this all checks out. You're you're free to go. Hey. Oh, I do apologize though, but you have actually missed your two o' clock flight. Toby, why you apologizing to us for, man? Our flight is at two o' clock. Tomorrow. Today, silly. Tomorrow. Why did you check into your flight twenty four hours early, bruv? Bruv, come on, mate. Come on, bruv. Ob see this. I'm obviously, obviously not a bad, my friend. Nice. We'll send you the next Brown boys. Yeah? Yeah, please do. I mean, if you want to. I didn't say brown. He said it.

Speaker 1 • 28:41
Okay, so you have this really smart skit by this Muslim, British Muslim comedy duo, Muslamic. How would bi analyze this particular skit? What is it doing for us? What perspective? You can start with that. What perspective is it showing us? Yeah, the Muslims perspective, right? The Muslims who were being stopped at the airports, who were getting kind of secondary screening. How is the world being turned upside down? Bleachy tells us this always happens in comedy, right? We're being centered on another perspective, the Muslim perspective. And the world as it is is being turned upside down and kind of anti right, anti structure, ritual of reversal. All words that are also on your study guide for the final anti right ritual of reversal. How is the world as it is being turned upside down? Any guesses? Yeah, Absolutely. Normally Toby should be running the show.

Speaker 1 • 29:59
Is Toby running the show? No, they're actually like, toby, come on. Like, you're not very intimidating. Like you need to like have better posture, yell a little bit. Toby starts to ask questions. They're like, man, we already know all of the questions. Here they are. This is how you should ask them. And in fact, here's a PDF of all of the answers. And so we see a moment in which an interrogation that should be run by the person who at the very least to us appears to be at the center of power, is suddenly not in charge. And so Belligi says that we see the world as it normally is through its temporary suspension through comedy. This world is actually turned upside down. And that's also why it is so pleasurable. He describes this as a laughter of recognition. We suddenly see how these things normally go by seeing a moment in which they don't go as they should.

Speaker 1 • 30:58
And that is funny and pleasurable to watch. And so we have. We're going to end with this quote from Humor Allows, he says, for a distortion of common sense reality. Those whose reality is already distorted because of stereotypes resort to humor to rectify and reassert their own sense. What is real. Right. Muslim is showing us what often does happen, right, but in a way in which they suddenly take charge. Comedy, Aliji writes, is an anti right that turns the world upside down by showing the audience the view from the other side. The majority's vision or structure is temporarily and imaginarily relegated to the status of anti structure. Or we could replace these words. The center is relegated to the periphery, while the minority's vision anti structure is elevated in its place. The periphery becomes the center, and in this reversal, the minority is released and the majority is given the opportunity to feel, or at least to see the world like a minority.

Speaker 1 • 32:12
And we know that Susan Falls and Belitte are both thinking about what this subversion does, what kind of transformative potential it has, but also what its risks are are okay, on Friday we're going to be thinking with two of my favorite thinkers of the semester, Jane Hill and Vershawn Ashanti Young. Please follow the two hour rule when reading. I would start with Young and then move to Hill afterwards, and I look forward to seeing then.

Speaker 2 • 32:47
It.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Exploring Time, Memory, and National Narratives in Anthropological Perspective
Apr 15, 2026, 11:00 AM • 44 mins

SUMMARY KEYWORDS
memory, ritual, music, national origin stories, Thanksgiving, Michael Jackson, David Silverman, critical history, myth, perspective, temporality, Native Americans, collective memory, identity, art, poetry, framing

SPEAKERS
Speaker 1, Speaker 2, Speaker 3, Speaker 4, Speaker 5, Speaker 6

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Speaker 1 • 00:01
In very similar facts, we apprehend time and we apprehend the human experience through time and space in terms of relative nearness, gender version and absence. Living in West Africa or Fort Field

Speaker 2 • 00:18
work, which is where Jackson did his early field work.

Speaker 1 • 00:21
Later he wrote, as he writes about in the piece for today, when he

Speaker 2 • 00:25
was in West Africa, he writes, although

Speaker 1 • 00:28
my wife and daughter were probably sitting

Speaker 2 • 00:30
down today at that very moment in

Speaker 1 • 00:32
our Cambridge flat, I do not think

Speaker 2 • 00:34
that this is happening now in another place, but is something that had occurred some time ago.

Speaker 1 • 00:40
And so he reflects on how we think in terms of time and space. And we often conflate something that is

Speaker 2 • 00:46
distant from us in space is also somehow distant in time.

Speaker 1 • 00:51
Remote places and remote periods in history,

Speaker 2 • 00:52
he writes, have something else in common.

Speaker 1 • 00:54
We cannot be sure that they are

Speaker 2 • 00:56
continuous with our world in the here and now.

Speaker 1 • 00:59
And unless we actually visit them, we cannot discover whether inhabitants are utterly alien or co evils just like us. And so he talks about how space

Speaker 2 • 01:10
and also time are othering mechanisms.

Speaker 1 • 01:13
They make Homo sapiens feel a kind

Speaker 2 • 01:18
of radical potential of difference.

Speaker 1 • 01:20
Someone who lives far away in space or far away in time, he said,

Speaker 2 • 01:24
or often imagined as being potentially radically different from us.

Speaker 1 • 01:33
So speaking to the past, how does

Speaker 2 • 01:35
the past show up in our lives?

Speaker 1 • 01:37
Something that Michael Jackson is thinking about.

Speaker 2 • 01:39
But I wanted to take a moment

Speaker 1 • 01:40
to think with you about how we

Speaker 2 • 01:42
might see the past in other ways. How do we contact the past?

Speaker 1 • 01:49
Here are some examples. Spirit MEDIUMS Prayer. Is it okay to pray to dead relatives? I don't mean asking them for things,

Speaker 2 • 02:06
but sometimes I like to talk to my deceased grandmother and it gives me comfort that maybe she's listening. Is this okay person is asking from kind of a religious perspective,

Speaker 3 • 02:18
especially the non African religious culture in China, that we always stand that like ancestors protect us, That people will go to the

Speaker 1 • 02:42
of ancestor.

Speaker 2 • 02:45
Ancestors. Such a great example. Yeah, thank you for sharing that. So your colleague is seen in many non Abrahamic religions, what we might call non monotheistic religions. There is a reverence for the ancestors.

Speaker 1 • 03:01
It is possible and in fact important

Speaker 2 • 03:04
to speak to and honor one's ancestors who are deceased.

Speaker 1 • 03:08
And there are rituals involving visiting the

Speaker 2 • 03:10
tombstones of people who. Or the grave sites of people who have passed away. I think actually very similar. Something that we also talked about.

Speaker 1 • 03:20
Right.

Speaker 2 • 03:20
In our week on religion. Something that is also. That also happens in Christian majority contexts, like in contemporary North America, contemporary Massachusetts, contemporary Ohio. Also a means of maintaining a relationship with someone who has died via their grave site.

Speaker 3 • 03:38
Right.

Speaker 2 • 03:39
And via the decoration of their grave site, sometimes legally contested. Thank you for sharing that. So some different ways that these can show up. Has anyone ever seen Teresa Caputo

Speaker 1 • 03:52
medium?

Speaker 2 • 03:53
Yes, some people have. My sister has as well.

Speaker 1 • 03:56
Okay. How do various cultures understand us as

Speaker 2 • 03:59
making contact across time? So I did also want to mention this. Michael Jackson works among the Maori in New Zealand. We have heard about the Maori in our video from last week.

Speaker 1 • 04:16
And he writes quite a bit, not

Speaker 2 • 04:18
in what we read for today, but he writes quite a bit about the role of dreams. And also he describes how dreams allow Maori to live across time, to have contact with ancestors.

Speaker 1 • 04:34
And also he often does this in his work. He points out other ways that we

Speaker 2 • 04:38
think about living across time.

Speaker 1 • 04:40
For example, if you have ever had

Speaker 2 • 04:42
the experience of what we call, in

Speaker 1 • 04:44
English, deja vu, the French word, this embodied feeling of already having lived something, of the past kind of resurging unexpectedly.

Speaker 2 • 04:53
Another example of how, for instance, in

Speaker 1 • 04:58
contemporary North America, we also describe this

Speaker 2 • 05:01
feeling of living across time, of the past kind of resurging in unexpected ways.

Speaker 1 • 05:07
Additionally, Western psychoanalysis, very interested in the way that the past is lived, in

Speaker 2 • 05:13
the present, informs the present, researches the

Speaker 1 • 05:15
present into the present in ways that

Speaker 2 • 05:17
are often difficult for the individual to see.

Speaker 1 • 05:23
We talked about remnants of the past as if they leave residue in the

Speaker 2 • 05:29
landscape of the present, whether that landscape

Speaker 1 • 05:33
is sacred in a kind of way that we could call religious, or if that landscape or object is sacred in

Speaker 2 • 05:40
the sense that, for instance, we don't want to sell a childhood home, or we don't want to throw away a

Speaker 1 • 05:46
necklace or give away a necklace that

Speaker 2 • 05:48
we never wear, that we find is

Speaker 1 • 05:49
ugly, but that was given to us by.

Speaker 2 • 05:51
By someone in our family, by a kind of ancestor.

Speaker 1 • 05:56
And so we've seen this before, right?

Speaker 2 • 05:58
The idea that sometimes pieces of earth

Speaker 1 • 06:01
can also be sacred, can bear or

Speaker 2 • 06:04
hold within them traces of the past. Indigenous Australians and also New Zealanders often

Speaker 1 • 06:13
believe that traces of the past are held in the earth and that a woman who passes over a particularly potent piece of land may find that she kind of takes the personality that is in the land into her womb, and

Speaker 2 • 06:28
so then when she becomes pregnant, she will carry that personality and give birth to it.

Speaker 1 • 06:34
We have similar ideas in the contemporary United States. Right? We sometimes give names of individuals, of ancestors to children in the hopes that

Speaker 2 • 06:45
there will be some type of proximity between them.

Speaker 1 • 06:47
We don't generally give names of people that we don't like.

Speaker 2 • 06:50
If, for example, I had a great grandmother that I didn't really like and that no one in my family liked

Speaker 1 • 06:56
I would not give her name to a child.

Speaker 2 • 07:01
And so we also have similar ideas, I think, in contemporary American culture. And finally, spirit mediums and prayer, as we have said, another way of kind of using the.

Speaker 1 • 07:15
Or calling forth the past into the

Speaker 2 • 07:19
present in ways that can transform the future.

Speaker 1 • 07:23
We also, when we talk about the past, we also talk about the past

Speaker 2 • 07:26
as a kind of raw material that can be used, but also of which we are heirs. Michael Jackson thinks about this, the beginning of the excerpt that we read for today.

Speaker 1 • 07:39
There are moments in length, he says,

Speaker 2 • 07:41
of which we later say, everything changed.

Speaker 1 • 07:44
Nothing was ever the same again. This is as true of our histories

Speaker 2 • 07:48
as of our lives. There is a before and an after. Our world was turned upside down.

Speaker 1 • 07:54
We suffered the eclipse of all that we took to be tried and true. This eclipse may follow bereavement or falling in love. It often brings us to rethink the meaning of first things, to ask what

Speaker 2 • 08:05
hold our histories have over us, and whether there is something about our first experiences in life that makes all that

Speaker 1 • 08:11
follows pale in comparison. And so Jackson here is interested in a slightly different way from Silverman, But

Speaker 2 • 08:21
Silverman is also interested in how we tell stories about where we come from and what made us who we are as individuals and also on a more community or national level.

Speaker 1 • 08:36
And Jackson is, as we heard in

Speaker 2 • 08:38
the moment that we read for today, going back to a first place for him, where he grew up, where his first wife lived as a child, and where they visited her parents before she died later in life. And Jackson is very attentive to how

Speaker 1 • 08:54
we speak of the past, as well

Speaker 2 • 08:57
as something that we have to reckon

Speaker 1 • 08:58
with, something that gives us information about ourselves, that authorizes us to do particular

Speaker 2 • 09:04
things or that is put upon us by other people in ways that we find inappropriate or unjust. And so, for example, discussions about white

Speaker 1 • 09:14
privilege, very similar to discussions about even

Speaker 2 • 09:18
something that seems kind of radically different,

Speaker 1 • 09:20
genetic testing, the idea that the past is either a key to information or

Speaker 2 • 09:26
the past is a burden imposed by others upon us.

Speaker 1 • 09:33
Anthropologists are very interested in moments when

Speaker 2 • 09:37
the past also destabilizes our sense of the present. Very interesting discussions about the way that genetic tests can authorize someone's participation or not in. In a community, specifically a minority community. And so some reporting from over the past ten years, with the rise of

Speaker 1 • 09:59
DNA test, they considered themselves white, but

Speaker 2 • 10:02
DNA tests told a more complex story.

Speaker 1 • 10:08
And so here we also see the ways that the past can be both authorizing, can be harnessed to allow us to do certain things, but also can be experienced as something that is put

Speaker 2 • 10:22
on us by other people.

Speaker 1 • 10:29
And finally, we are going to talk

Speaker 2 • 10:30
a little bit more about history writing,

Speaker 1 • 10:32
but also a way that we try to manage the past and the way that it intrudes into the present. History writing is often. We talked about this last week with

Speaker 2 • 10:44
our word teleology, right? The idea that human history is moving progressively towards something better. This is the way that often history has been written.

Speaker 1 • 10:58
Michael Jackson also points out that in

Speaker 2 • 11:00
historical writing, we're often transforming raw material into an arc. In history writing and also in memoir writing, he's written his own memoir, right?

Speaker 1 • 11:11
Or when someone says to you, why are you here? Why did you go to bu? You probably try to tell a story

Speaker 2 • 11:18
in response to that.

Speaker 1 • 11:19
Why do you study the thing that you studied? You probably try to locate a kind of beginning, middle and end to explain

Speaker 2 • 11:27
why you ended up where you ended up.

Speaker 1 • 11:31
And we also see this on a

Speaker 2 • 11:33
kind of more macro level with the writing of history.

Speaker 1 • 11:39
Some historians have pointed out as well the importance of history, of historical writing

Speaker 2 • 11:49
as a kind of organizing force that

Speaker 1 • 11:52
also, as we will see, justifies the

Speaker 2 • 11:56
present and also helps uplift the present, as a kind of improvement upon the past.

Speaker 1 • 12:02
This is again, this word that we have seen, teleology, Something that, as we saw last week, Anna Singh says we need to abandon.

Speaker 2 • 12:10
You need to try to write outside of its heliological framework, a framework that says what is happening now is better than what happened before.

Speaker 1 • 12:19
It's actually very hard to do if you try to. If you have ever tried to do

Speaker 2 • 12:23
it, it is hard to let go of that particular framework.

Speaker 1 • 12:29
And so now we're going to shift

Speaker 2 • 12:32
to thinking with Michael Jackson about time,

Speaker 1 • 12:35
about how Homo sapiens live across time,

Speaker 2 • 12:38
about what time is.

Speaker 1 • 12:41
And again, as we have seen, Michael

Speaker 2 • 12:43
Jackson is interested in how the past resurges into the present and how also

Speaker 1 • 12:50
we try to capture, he says, incredibly, imperfectly, right? He says it can be liberating or it can be imprisoning.

Speaker 2 • 12:59
The realization that the past is always impossible to fully return to.

Speaker 1 • 13:04
And so I want to take a moment to think with you about some

Speaker 2 • 13:09
of the questions that Jackson raises. And I'm going to start by playing the beginning of a video for you.

Speaker 1 • 13:16
This is going to seem a little strange, but there is a reason. So I'm wondering.

Speaker 2 • 13:21
I'd like you all to just think about. We will listen to the whole song because you have a bunch of.

Speaker 1 • 13:24
Bunch of videos. What does this song do for you?

Speaker 2 • 13:27
What does it make you Think of.

Speaker 1 • 13:50
Sa.

Speaker 4 • 14:16
She expected the world but it flew away from a reach so she ran away. Life goes on get so heavy.

Speaker 2 • 15:45
Okay, I'm interested in hearing from you.

Speaker 1 • 15:50
What does this song make you think of? How many people.

Speaker 5 • 15:58
Yeah, yeah.

Speaker 2 • 16:31
Super interesting. Do you. Why is that the. So your colleague is saying this off is that it reminds of a moment

Speaker 1 • 16:38
in which kind of optimistic moments in

Speaker 2 • 16:43
which environmentalism people were starting to have kind of conversations about environmentalism. They're trying to make small efforts around it. But is it because the content of the song or maybe the moment when you heard the song?

Speaker 1 • 16:57
Yeah, I think it's partially. Super interesting.

Speaker 2 • 17:19
I wasn't sure if it was because of the elephant.

Speaker 1 • 17:21
I thought probably not, but super interesting.

Speaker 2 • 17:24
Okay, so kind of a personal experience about optimism, the kind of conversations that are happening at the time.

Speaker 1 • 17:30
Other reactions.

Speaker 2 • 17:37
Does anyone like this song? I didn't realize that the music video to the song was so strange. It's not what I expected.

Speaker 1 • 17:47
Okay, I'm going to show you what this song makes me think of this.

Speaker 2 • 17:52
This is a neighborhood in Tunis where I lived when I was doing, actually, even before I started my field work. And I used to drive a friend's

Speaker 1 • 18:02
daughter to school, and she would.

Speaker 2 • 18:05
You would listen to the song every morning. And during the refrain, she would stop, stand up in the backseat, and pound the ceiling of my car. And that's always how I knew that she wasn't wearing her seatbelt because she refused to wear a seatbelt.

Speaker 1 • 18:20
Like, put your seatbelt on.

Speaker 2 • 18:23
And so that every time I hear the song, I have a visceral memory

Speaker 1 • 18:26
of driving down these streets, listening to

Speaker 2 • 18:29
this song, driving this child in the backseat. And we hear a similar example, Michael Jackson.

Speaker 1 • 18:38
He says, forty five years later, I'm

Speaker 2 • 18:39
just going to play the beginning of the song for you.

Speaker 1 • 18:42
He googled the song, found it on YouTube. He says kids first listened to this

Speaker 2 • 19:11
song when he went into a movie theater in Bombay in nineteen sixty three, nineteen sixty four.

Speaker 1 • 19:18
And for years after, he didn't understand

Speaker 2 • 19:20
anything in the movie. But for years after he thought about the song, afterwards, he did work. He sat in London with the homeless.

Speaker 1 • 19:27
And he thought about the song constantly.

Speaker 2 • 19:29
He couldn't.

Speaker 1 • 19:30
He could. Could never find it.

Speaker 2 • 19:31
He had no way to know what it was, but he remembered it.

Speaker 1 • 19:35
And so he's very interested, he says, in the power of particular things, like

Speaker 2 • 19:40
sound, which we're going to talk about more on Friday.

Speaker 1 • 19:43
Like music to transport us across time. Music, more than any medium I know,

Speaker 2 • 19:49
he writes, has the power to carry one across space.

Speaker 1 • 19:51
And time reviving dormant memories, recovering lost connections.

Speaker 2 • 19:56
But memory is so notoriously mutable that

Speaker 1 • 19:58
it is never the past one returns

Speaker 2 • 19:59
to, but a version or illusion of it. And this sense of time is irreversible in the past, Irretrievable in its original form may either. So you're saying earlier. Liberate us to live more completely in the present or drive us to despair.

Speaker 1 • 20:13
Has anyone ever experienced this?

Speaker 2 • 20:15
The power of sound like a song to transport you across time?

Speaker 1 • 20:23
Yeah, yeah,

Speaker 3 • 20:27
yeah. Because I feel like. Listen to a different song, like, every so often. You know, it's. Every song there is, like, reminds me of a particular period of my life. Like, oh, this is the stuff that I'm listening to. I don't like, you know, your new year of high school.

Speaker 2 • 20:51
Absolutely. So songs that remind you of a particular moment in your life, Like, a moment when you listen to that song over and over again.

Speaker 1 • 20:58
Yeah.

Speaker 2 • 20:59
Is there someone else in the back row? Yeah. What were you gonna say?

Speaker 1 • 21:03
Yeah, yeah, absolutely.

Speaker 2 • 21:18
So maybe a place that you haven't

Speaker 1 • 21:20
been to for a while that you're

Speaker 2 • 21:21
not at all the time, music can kind of take you there.

Speaker 1 • 21:24
So it can be destabilizing. Very pleasurable.

Speaker 2 • 21:28
It can be kind of rooting.

Speaker 1 • 21:29
Yeah, that's a great.

Speaker 2 • 21:30
That's a great point.

Speaker 1 • 21:33
I've been at weddings before in Tunisia, also one in the United States, where someone said, do not play this song.

Speaker 2 • 21:42
This song gets this one person really upset. It was her husband's favorite song. Please don't play it. Her husband's died. Please don't play it. And so we also can experience particular songs.

Speaker 1 • 21:54
Right. As rooting as kind of connecting, but

Speaker 2 • 21:58
also as potentially destabilizing.

Speaker 1 • 22:00
Yeah,

Speaker 2 • 22:32
Sure.

Speaker 1 • 22:32
So you're.

Speaker 2 • 22:33
So your colleague's talking about this Bollywood song and how potentially the songs that

Speaker 1 • 22:37
maybe most recently listened to were kind of the early two thousands. And so it kind of takes you

Speaker 2 • 22:42
back to that time.

Speaker 1 • 22:43
Yeah.

Speaker 5 • 22:44
So recently, I discovered my friend is an extreme aversion to Baby by Justin Bieber. And the reason why is she used to share a room with her, like, sister, and her sister would, like, play it constantly, and apparently it drove her insane. So, like, I was like, oh, my God, like, it's like Coachella. Let's totally listen to this. And I've never seen, like, she's always, like, the calmest person. She never mentions anything. She turned to me so quick with, turn that off. I hate that song. I can't even, like, listen to two seconds of it. And I was like, okay, let me just, like, test this out. I put like two random segments of it. It was like one second she turned it off. I know it faded.

Speaker 3 • 23:22
I'm like, oh, my God.

Speaker 5 • 23:23
Like, you hate this.

Speaker 1 • 23:24
Super interesting.

Speaker 2 • 23:25
So story about Baby by Justin Bieber. I'm like, let me think of that song.

Speaker 1 • 23:29
Listen to it on Friday.

Speaker 2 • 23:31
But how their friends, right? Cannot stand listening to this song. But we do this, right? I have. My brother just got married.

Speaker 1 • 23:40
He had a no play playlist.

Speaker 2 • 23:42
Like songs to not play at his wedding.

Speaker 1 • 23:44
Right.

Speaker 2 • 23:45
I requested a song was on the do not playlist. Very offended.

Speaker 1 • 23:49
Okay.

Speaker 2 • 23:50
I also want to take a moment with you to listen to this particular poem. So this is a poem about september eleventh. Who was alive on september eleventh?

Speaker 1 • 24:00
Very few people.

Speaker 3 • 24:01
Okay.

Speaker 2 • 24:01
I was alive. Mono was alive. Kassandra were alive.

Speaker 1 • 24:05
A few other people. Not too many. Let's listen to this poem. This is a short poem.

Speaker 2 • 24:09
It's by a Polish poet, Zimborska. Zimborska. You listen to it.

Speaker 3 • 24:19
Poetry foundation dot org Photograph from september

Speaker 4 • 24:25
eleventh by Visawava Zhimborska. They jumped from the burning floors. One, two, a few more. Higher, lower. The photograph halted them in life and now keeps them above the earth. Toward the earth. Each is still complete with a particular face and blood well hidden. There's enough time for hair to come loose, for keys and coins to fall from pockets. They're still within the air's reach, within the compass of places that have just now opened. I can do only two things for them. Describe this flight and not add a last line.

Speaker 1 • 25:31
Okay, so a very beautiful poem, a

Speaker 2 • 25:33
very arresting poem written in the wake of september eleventh by a Polish poet.

Speaker 1 • 25:39
Translated into English.

Speaker 2 • 25:41
Photograph from september eleventh. What is happening in this photograph?

Speaker 1 • 25:49
Yeah, absolutely.

Speaker 2 • 25:52
People jumping from the World Trade Center. What is happening? As they fall, there's enough time for

Speaker 1 • 26:04
hair to come loose, for keys and

Speaker 2 • 26:05
coins to fall from pockets.

Speaker 1 • 26:08
It's like a few seconds, Right? Zamborska says at the end, I can

Speaker 2 • 26:14
do only two things for them. Describe this light and not add a last line.

Speaker 1 • 26:21
What does that mean?

Speaker 2 • 26:21
Not add a last line? Why is that something that she's doing for them? That's okay, kind of.

Speaker 1 • 26:36
Right?

Speaker 2 • 26:37
It's a very union, kind of sad column.

Speaker 3 • 26:38
Yeah,

Speaker 1 • 26:50
Absolutely. It's preserving them in this final moment Right before their bodies kind of disappear. Right.

Speaker 2 • 27:01
How many people know this photograph? The photograph of people don't even know the World Trade Center.

Speaker 1 • 27:09
Okay. Many people, all of you were born, except for a few after september eleventh. So what does this tell us?

Speaker 2 • 27:25
This tells us something about the way that History is told about origin stories, about something that we could call myths.

Speaker 1 • 27:35
Myths not in the sense that they are not true, but in the sense that they are foundational stories that are

Speaker 2 • 27:42
transferred across generations, that are about who Americans are, where they come from.

Speaker 1 • 27:59
And so now we're going to shift to thinking about representations and history writing, and we're going to think about how

Speaker 2 • 28:07
we tell the stories of our lives,

Speaker 1 • 28:10
but even more so of the nation

Speaker 2 • 28:13
that we currently are in now.

Speaker 1 • 28:14
So David Silverman, right, is writing about

Speaker 2 • 28:17
contemporary North America, the contemporary United States. In fact,

Speaker 1 • 28:22
Michael Jackson is writing about

Speaker 2 • 28:25
the relationship between one's own story, the way that one tries to tell a coherent story of oneself, and the way that we try to write stories of our nation.

Speaker 1 • 28:37
Memory, he writes, reworks the past in ways that make it easier for us

Speaker 2 • 28:42
to live in the present.

Speaker 1 • 28:44
And while it may be consoling to think that one's life or the history of one's nation has a beginning, middle

Speaker 2 • 28:49
and end, with time does not evolve linearly or smoothly, or as a chain

Speaker 1 • 28:55
of cause and effect. Our lives are so tied up, he writes, with the lives of others, that

Speaker 2 • 29:03
it is impossible to disentangle a single strand and confidently identify it as yours or mine. David Silverman is doing something slightly different.

Speaker 1 • 29:17
David Silverman is not interested so much

Speaker 2 • 29:20
in how people write coherent accounts of themselves and how the stories that we

Speaker 1 • 29:24
tell about ourselves have this beginning, middle, and end in the same way that

Speaker 2 • 29:28
stories that we tell about nations have a kind of beginning, middle and end. David Silverman is interested in, in the stories that we tell about communities or nations.

Speaker 1 • 29:40
And he does something that he calls critical history. He's a historian, but we're reading him here because I think that the ways that he talks about the writing of history is incredibly useful for us thinking as anthropologists. Syri's critical history, he writes, tends to be hard on the living. It challenges us to see distortions embedded

Speaker 2 • 30:06
in the heroic national origin myths we have been taught since childhood.

Speaker 1 • 30:09
This is what he does in the

Speaker 2 • 30:11
piece that we read for today. It is a kind of reckoning that he is writing in part, he says, for himself.

Speaker 1 • 30:17
It takes enemies demonized by previous generations and treats them as worthy of understanding

Speaker 2 • 30:22
in their particular context.

Speaker 1 • 30:24
Ideological absolutes, civility and savagery, liberty and tyranny, and especially us and them, begin to blur people from our society who

Speaker 2 • 30:34
are not supposed to matter and whose

Speaker 1 • 30:35
historical experiences show us the injustices of

Speaker 2 • 30:38
the past, how the injustices of the past have shaped the injustices of the present, move from the shadows into the

Speaker 1 • 30:45
light because critical history challenges assumptions and authority, it often leaves us feeling uncomfortable. And Silverman writes about this in the

Speaker 2 • 30:54
book that we read, just a short

Speaker 1 • 30:56
excerpt from today about how uncomfortable his own work makes him feel. And so I want to spend the rest of class thinking with you about

Speaker 2 • 31:08
what David Silverman brings to the table

Speaker 1 • 31:10
for us and the ways that we as anthropologists can think with the ideas that he gives us.

Speaker 2 • 31:17
And I want to start just kind

Speaker 1 • 31:18
of by looking at the. The very opening of his piece in which he talks about the history of

Speaker 2 • 31:27
the holiday of Thanksgiving. So we were studying here together in the fall semester. This would be our week right before Thanksgiving, so it'd be very apropos.

Speaker 1 • 31:36
But we're going to use him today

Speaker 2 • 31:37
to do a bit of shorter kind of cultural analysis.

Speaker 1 • 31:42
And so what does he tell us

Speaker 2 • 31:43
about the holiday of Thanksgiving?

Speaker 1 • 31:45
He tells us that the way that

Speaker 2 • 31:47
it has been celebrated has ebbed and flowed, that it was not really celebrated

Speaker 1 • 31:53
widely in the United States until the

Speaker 2 • 31:55
late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, and that that spread of the holiday in the particular narrative that we have today

Speaker 1 • 32:02
of the holiday, was promoted in part by the state as a means of

Speaker 2 • 32:08
creating social and national reconciliation in the wake of the Civil War. Right. So in the wake of kind of

Speaker 1 • 32:15
the eighteen sixties in the standard telly,

Speaker 2 • 32:19
Silverman tells us a band of pious

Speaker 1 • 32:21
Englishmen, referred to as Pilgrims, were so

Speaker 2 • 32:23
desperate for religious liberty that they were

Speaker 1 • 32:25
willing to brave the dangers of the angry Atlantic and the howling wilderness to

Speaker 2 • 32:30
build a new society in America.

Speaker 1 • 32:33
This is again the story of Thanksgiving that we have been told since approximately

Speaker 2 • 32:38
the late nineteenth century.

Speaker 1 • 32:39
For those of you who went to

Speaker 2 • 32:40
high school in the United States, this

Speaker 1 • 32:42
may be very familiar to you.

Speaker 2 • 32:44
Perhaps it is not.

Speaker 1 • 32:44
Occasionally it has not been. They, the pious Englishman created a compact,

Speaker 2 • 32:50
the later basis for the US Constitution.

Speaker 1 • 32:53
And then near death Indians fed the

Speaker 2 • 32:57
English and taught them how to plant corn and where to fish.

Speaker 1 • 33:00
They helped the colonizers and then moved off the stage. And so David Silverman tells us the role of the Indians of the Native Americans in the story of the national origin of the United States has been

Speaker 2 • 33:25
one of helping that then he says,

Speaker 1 • 33:29
moved off the stage. And he sees this in a number of places. He sees this first with this song.

Speaker 2 • 33:37
Just going to play a very short excerpt of it. How many people know the song My Country Tis of Thee? Okay, great. So we're just going to listen to this for a moment. Kelly Clarkson, an inaugural American Eigel performance,

Speaker 4 • 33:53
At one point, an avowed supporter of Ron Paul, but Then went on to tell Rolling Stone that she did in

Speaker 3 • 33:58
fact vote for President Obama. It.

Speaker 6 • 34:27
I come Streets of thee Sweet land of liberty of thee I see

Speaker 3 • 34:45
and

Speaker 6 • 34:46
where my fathers died Then the field comes forever from every mountain side.

Speaker 1 • 35:13
Okay. Kelly Clarkson, Presidential Inauguration. The song is performed. Right.

Speaker 2 • 35:23
Was the de facto national anthem, Silverman tells us, until nineteen thirty one. How does Silverman analyze this song? These words being kind of the central refrain.

Speaker 1 • 35:39
What does this song tell us

Speaker 2 • 35:43
about the American national story? The story that America. Americans tell themselves about themselves.

Speaker 5 • 35:59
Yeah,

Speaker 1 • 36:09
Absolutely. That's definitely true.

Speaker 2 • 36:11
The role of freedom.

Speaker 1 • 36:13
Right.

Speaker 2 • 36:13
The role of liberty.

Speaker 1 • 36:16
So we know that the origin story. Right.

Speaker 2 • 36:19
Land where my father's died. Lands of the Pilgrim's Pride. From every mountainside let freedom reign Certain

Speaker 1 • 36:25
values that are tied to it. Who are the forefathers in this story? The pilgrims.

Speaker 2 • 36:36
Right.

Speaker 1 • 36:41
Silverman tells us, leaving Indians out of

Speaker 2 • 36:45
the category of my fathers.

Speaker 1 • 36:49
Right. Just as we saw Land where my fathers died. Land of the Pilgrim's Pride carried important lessons.

Speaker 2 • 36:57
It was another reminder of which race

Speaker 1 • 36:59
ran the country and whose values mattered. This is a point that Silverman makes

Speaker 2 • 37:06
about the writing history.

Speaker 1 • 37:08
Right. He says that writing the past explains and justifies the present, explains and justifies the social order by teaching that the rulers came by their position heroically, righteously, and even with the blessing of the divine.

Speaker 2 • 37:25
I'm going to take a moment to look at these.

Speaker 1 • 37:26
This poor teacher, these poor school children

Speaker 2 • 37:28
in two thousand four. I've been showing this for a long time.

Speaker 1 • 37:31
It's a very interesting example

Speaker 2 • 37:35
of what Silverman is pointing out to us. So we have here some quotes from

Speaker 1 • 37:43
children who participated in a recreation of the first Thanksgiving in which the pilgrims,

Speaker 2 • 37:49
as we said, were helped by the Native Americans who then, as Silverman tells us, moved off the stage and the Pilgrims assumed the central role in the national origin myth.

Speaker 1 • 38:02
Mis meaning story. Our Thanksgiving play was about the Pilgrims

Speaker 2 • 38:11
and how they came to America and

Speaker 1 • 38:13
how the Thanksgiving feast went. Haley said our Thanksgiving play was fun

Speaker 2 • 38:17
because I was a Native American and

Speaker 1 • 38:19
we got to help the pilgrims. Samantha was the turkey and she was

Speaker 2 • 38:22
funny because she pretended to be afraid of the Native Americans because she thought they would shoot her.

Speaker 1 • 38:27
Caitlin was playing George. Ismail played the part of the narrator. Some people had spears and guns.

Speaker 2 • 38:32
We had fun, and that's what counts.

Speaker 1 • 38:35
Caesar.

Speaker 2 • 38:36
Third graders.

Speaker 1 • 38:43
At the play, we had really.

Speaker 2 • 38:44
We had.

Speaker 1 • 38:45
We really had fun, said Dylan. We got to have spears and two guns and we had pie and pop.

Speaker 2 • 38:49
We also had popcorn and watched a movie.

Speaker 1 • 38:51
We dressed up. I was a pilgrim.

Speaker 2 • 38:53
Be it Apples and chips.

Speaker 1 • 38:57
Do we see anything in here that

Speaker 2 • 39:01
reminds us of what Silverman says is happening in recreations of this origin story?

Speaker 1 • 39:11
So this is, we've heard right from

Speaker 2 • 39:13
many of our social theorists, what happens

Speaker 1 • 39:15
in school is important. Schools are main kind of spaces through

Speaker 2 • 39:23
which particular ideas and stories are disseminated.

Speaker 1 • 39:30
What role? Yeah, what role do we see?

Speaker 3 • 39:44
Thanks.

Speaker 1 • 40:13
Do you think there's a lot of implications? Absolutely, absolutely.

Speaker 2 • 40:20
Certainly a treatment of Native Americans in

Speaker 1 • 40:22
a racialized way also as being othered. Absolutely. She has something to say up here. Other thoughts? What is the role of the Native Americans here?

Speaker 2 • 40:38
Our Thanksgiving play was fun because I was a Native American and we got

Speaker 1 • 40:40
to help the pilgrims. This is what Silverman tells us is the story that is told via these particular plates.

Speaker 2 • 40:56
That Native Americans were help mates.

Speaker 1 • 40:59
They were not at the center of

Speaker 2 • 41:01
the national origin story.

Speaker 1 • 41:06
He reads the song and this play as part of the ideologically loaded caricature of friendly Indians inviting the pilgrims to colonize them. And it was practically the only cameo Indians made, he says, in the school curriculum. He also says, you know, a lot of kids liked this.

Speaker 2 • 41:26
As your colleague is pointing out, the kids are kind of also interested in the fact that they got popcorn and.

Speaker 1 • 41:31
Right.

Speaker 2 • 41:31
They got like different sweets and such and they got to pretend hurt one

Speaker 1 • 41:36
another with spears and guns. Interesting.

Speaker 2 • 41:39
But also, Silverman says not all children enjoyed it. Some children actually felt

Speaker 1 • 41:49
the weight of the story that the particular play was

Speaker 2 • 41:53
telling, specifically a Native American child who is inscripted to play. And so this is an interesting moment

Speaker 1 • 42:02
then for us to reflect on the

Speaker 2 • 42:07
framings of national origin stories as we see them.

Speaker 1 • 42:13
There we go. And so the framings that you see about the story of the birth of the United States. It's worth asking, how is the encounter between European settlers, European pilgrims and Native

Speaker 2 • 42:37
American Indians in the seventeenth century depicted?

Speaker 1 • 42:40
And also, where does the story start? Whose perspective does the camera follow?

Speaker 2 • 42:47
Talked about this in our discussion of Kedi, Right. Which is trying to recenter film around cats. And some of you mentioned how the camera itself kind of follows the perspective of the cats and human beings come

Speaker 1 • 42:58
into the frame of the film when

Speaker 2 • 43:00
they enter the frame that the cat is in.

Speaker 1 • 43:03
It's also worth considering that when you

Speaker 2 • 43:05
watch a movie that tells a particular

Speaker 1 • 43:07
origin story, whose perspective is followed.

Speaker 2 • 43:13
And so we have some examples of that framings for the national origin story.

Speaker 1 • 43:17
The pilgrim Father's perilous voyage.

Speaker 2 • 43:20
The founding of a new nation. So this is something available on Amazon Prime.

Speaker 1 • 43:25
From the Old World to the New. The quest for religious freedom. In sixteen twenty one, Hunter Puritan ordered

Speaker 2 • 43:31
the Mayflower bound for the New World.

Speaker 1 • 43:32
These people were the Pilgrim Fathers. This is the story of a group of religious separatists who sailed across the

Speaker 2 • 43:37
Atlantic in sixteen twenty and helped shape the laws and ways of life of

Speaker 1 • 43:42
what was to become the United States.

Speaker 2 • 43:44
It reenacts the pilgrim's perilous Germany.

Speaker 1 • 43:48
And so we often see stories telling

Speaker 2 • 43:52
the origin of the United States that

Speaker 1 • 43:55
start with the pilgrims and start with their voyage.

Speaker 2 • 44:00
I'm not going to watch this, but you can watch it if you are interested.

Speaker 1 • 44:04
That starts with their perilous voyage. And it was perilous. Right? And when they got here, people died as well. But this is how the dating often starts. So Silverman says we should pay attention

Speaker 2 • 44:18
to the temporality, to the ways that particular stories are made to have a beginning and an end.

Speaker 1 • 44:25
And where the beginning is and where the end is matters. We'll think about that perhaps a little

Speaker 2 • 44:29
bit more together on Friday. On Friday we will be talking about Mario's piece on On Sound in Accra, Ghana.

Speaker 1 • 44:40
I look forward to discussing it with you. It's a really excellent piece.

Speaker 2 • 44:44
Pay attention to the concept of not noise. See you then.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Exploring Space, Place, and Social Hierarchies in Anthropology
Apr 13, 2026, 11:01 AM • 43 mins

SUMMARY KEYWORDS
space and place, Yi-Fu Tuan, Anne Meneley, social hierarchy, public and private spheres, gift exchange, bodily comportment, architecture, urban planning, reciprocity, habitus, anthropology, women's gatherings, Zabeed Yemen, status negotiation

SPEAKERS
Speaker 1, Speaker 2, Speaker 3

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Speaker 1 • 00:00
Apologist in the body and how we think about space in relation to our body. He makes very interesting points in this book, Space and Place. He notes, for instance, that oftentimes when we describe other things in space, of course we're describing them in relation to our body. What is high or low, what is left and right in relation to my body, in particular, if I'm speaking to you, might be the inverse for you. And he's also interested in how human beings live in space, but also shape space and use space to convey messages about themselves or other human beings. And so we have space as kind of means of giving us information about the societies that we live in as a kind of diagnostic tool. We'll see some examples of that. But also space in many ways, like language, as usable as a tool by Homo sapiens who are giving information about themselves or information about other people.

Speaker 1 • 01:14
I wanted to give you an idea of some of the, I think, really interesting insights that Tuan gives us in Space and Place. He's interested, for example, in. This is a kind of Freudian take on how human beings learn the limits of their own bodies initially, right? The distinction, even between a child, what is one's body, and what is outside of one's body is not learned until slight, until months after birth. And also, he says, this distinction not only between the limits of one's body and what is outside of one's body, but also what is space versus place, is something that is learned. Antoine conceptualizes space, he says, as a kind of freedom, something that is available for transformation. Homo sapiens often speak about space as opportunity, and they also, he says, speak about space as threat. He's interested, for example, he is a geographer, in how this shows up in settler colonial discourses, something that we'll talk about on Wednesday as well, with the idea or the assertion that oftentimes space does not have other human beings in it.

Speaker 1 • 02:41
So the idea that no one was there when I arrived, for instance, or the youths will talk about this on Wednesday as well, that space is quote, unquote, discovered by one Homo sapien. Place, on the other hand, Tuan tells us, is something that is known. It gives a sense of security. And he's very interested in how we know space. He says we sometimes know space directly. If you've ever had the experience of going back to, for instance, a place where you lived for a long time, you may remember how to open a door. Maybe there's a particular. The front door sticks. You have to turn the key in a particular way. You may Remember how to open that door without necessarily thinking about it. You may remember how to walk up or down particular stage steps. What steps, for instance, creak, which knob on a faucet turns on the hot water versus the cold water. These are the types of ways that we may know a space or know something that has become a place for us.

Speaker 1 • 03:49
He says we also know places through concepts or symbols because we've been given drawings of that or because people have told us stories about that. So there also may be places that you know that you have actually never visited. A family home, for example, or a city that is incredibly important, even a city perhaps that is religiously important. These are things that you may know or feel attached to without having ever necessarily been there. Antoine is also interested in how space is structured by hierarchy. And again, how space gives us information about the way that a society is set up. And so, to give you some examples that he gives us, every person, he reminds us, is at the center of their own world. And cities and buildings, he says, are structured similarly. We often talk about the center of cities as the most critical part of an area.

Speaker 1 • 04:58
And the center of cities are often controlled by the most resource rich groups. We also sometimes think of buildings as having a front and a back. You can see this in Back Bay. This is something if you ever go on a tour of Boston, they will mention we have kind of the grand entrances, lovely houses, commonwealth or beacons, and there are back entrances that are hidden, that are on alleyways ways. And so these entrances, who uses them, Something that a geographer will immediately point to as an indication or a source of information about hierarchy in a particular society. And also talk about space as populated by humans in particular places. So, for example, a space that could show social stratification and class could be space that is considered to be overcrowded. So overcrowded government housing, packed student dorms, apartments that are like closets in, for example, a very expensive metropolis, New York City like Boston.

Speaker 1 • 06:22
This gives us information about the resource distribution in a particular society. And also we see how people play with those ideas. Chuan points out, for example, that sometimes people say, well, I live in a closet, I live in the center of New York City, so that's fine with me. I don't really spend that much time in my apartment. And I like knowing my neighbors, I like the sociality, I like knowing what my neighbor is cooking for dinner, etcetera. And so we see, right, how space is diagnostic. It gives us information about what a society looks like, how it is structured, how resources are distributed, but also how human, how human beings are agential, how they reformulate, what are potentially disadvantages of how they exist in relation to this space. Tuan also points out something that I think is super interesting. And to be honest, before I read him when I was in graduate school, I never thought about which is that most of the spaces that we live in have been carved out for us by other people.

Speaker 1 • 07:36
Very few of us will probably ever live in a space that we carve out for ourselves. This has a lot of impact on us. Tuan is interested in, for example, thinking about urban planning more general. Again, critical geographer. If you live in a town with a hospital and the hospital has no windows on its ground floor, how might that affect you? This is something that anthropologists have been interested in, in the treatment of, of epidemics. Sometimes international organizations have built hospitals in various parts of the world to help care for people who were victims of a particular pandemic. And they would sometimes build hospitals without windows or with very few windows. What do you think this would do? How would you feel about going to a hospital with very few windows? Yeah, That's a great point. So if you feel very isolating, it can mess with your conception of time.

Speaker 1 • 08:53
It's kind of like when you go to the movie theater. If you ever go at like two PM and then you come out and it's four thirty and it's still light out, it feels very strange. Right. Your conception of time has been messed with. It's a really interesting point. What about if someone in your family were ill and they needed to go to the hospital? Would you like to go to a hospital that had no windows? Why not? What's wrong with the hospital with no windows? Yeah,

Speaker 2 • 09:29
I think because human beings obviously are accustomed to being outside people that we see, it disembodies a person. It unpleasantly, it separates them from their typical environment. Especially when in a hospital, they are already, you know, ill and already unpleasantly separated from their environment.

Speaker 1 • 09:53
That's a great point. Right. It would be kind of feel like a radically different environment. You would be very closed off, which is not an amazing thing to think about when you are ill. Right. You're about to be separated from your family or the people caring for you. What about transparency? If you look at most buildings that we have today, very few buildings have few windows. Sometimes government buildings won't have windows on the first floor, for instance, something that I have occasionally noticed, but very unusual to not have windows. What's going on in this hospital? People said, and so something that in a particular set of cases in West Africa in relation to the Ebola virus, something that some anthropologists did, who consulted with the World Health Organization on why people were not using hospitals that had been built specifically to help treat people who were ill.

Speaker 1 • 11:08
Anthropologists pointed out the hospitals don't have any windows. It's a little creepy. People can't see what's going on inside. So these are the kinds of questions that John is interested in. Another one, kind of more of a banal one. You are in a park with no benches but trails. What does that make possible? Yeah, That's an excellent point. So your. Your colleague is pointing out how it prevents potentially sleeping there overnight. Right. So some might suggest this is a way of keeping a park more secure. It also prevents people who need to sit down, unless they can sit on the ground, from coming. It makes it kind of a more athletic site. Might not be easy to come, for example, with children. If you're carrying things, it might be nice to be able to sit down or put your things down on a surface. Your colleague also mentioned that sometimes area cities have created benches that have,

Speaker 2 • 12:41
what

Speaker 1 • 12:42
do you call them, like elbow rest railings on them to prevent people from being able to lay down to sleep. These are all ways in which spaces that we live in are built by other people, and they directly affect how we use those spaces in ways that are potentially not always visible to us. I also want to show you an example, just one more example from Tuan that I think is really interesting, where Tuan talks about how Homo sapiens experience space. This is about Nielsen, a widower. So someone whose wife has died. His wife died in childbirth, the birth of their sixth child. Nielsen worked as a maintenance man for a large firm. By working on the second shift, he could see his children off to school and be at home when they returned in the early afternoon. Nielsen's younger, unmarried sister had moved in with him after his wife died. She would come home about five, cook dinner, put the children to bed, and then retire herself.

Speaker 1 • 13:52
Nielsen returned to a full house, but felt its emptiness. When I come home from work in the nights, he said, I feel empty. I feel coming home. I feel kind of funny, a funny feeling that I'm going into an empty house. Sichuan uses this example to think also about, in kind of a very simple way, how all of us experience space. Is the house that Nielsen is coming home to empty? No, they're actually like six people there. Sounds kind of packed. Why does it feel empty? Because his wife isn't there. Absolutely. And so this tells us something about how we think about spaces in relation to the presence of other people. Very similarly to our week on economics where we talked about exchange, we talked about gifts, how we think about people as kind of leaving a residue of themselves in the gifts that they give us, even if we don't necessarily like the gift. Right.

Speaker 1 • 15:09
And how our relationships with the people who have given us gifts may inflect what we do with those gifts. We saw those examples, right? Someone who gives us a gift, like a boyfriend who gives us a gift, breaks up with us, throw away the presents that they gave us or sell them. But a gift maybe from an elder in one's family, even if one doesn't like it, one might keep for one's entire life because of this relationship between objects and people. And also we see here space and people, this idea that there is a kind of residue of the person. So Tuan's argument, very simple argument, is that place is shaped by humans and by our experience of sharing space with other humans. And so I want to shift to thinking with you about Anne Meneley's book for today, Tournaments of Value in the late nineteen nineties. Kind of a classic in Middle Eastern anthropology.

Speaker 1 • 16:23
And I think a really interesting book. Pretty fun fieldwork. So she's working in Zabeed, Yemen. You can see right here. What was her fieldwork like? What was her research? Yeah, She basically went to a bunch of parties. Sounds kind of nice. And I can tell you that when she argued for that as a kind of research, she had to justify why it was intellectually important. Can anyone guess how she might have made that argument, that it's worth studying women's private parties? Kind of a hard question. Any ideas? Yeah, So, absolutely. So there's an argument. There's a gender argument here.

Speaker 3 • 17:52
Right.

Speaker 1 • 17:53
We know that earlier on in anthropology, a lot of fieldwork was done with men, in part because early anthropologists were primarily men and had easier access to other men. So there is a gender argument here. There's also an argument about taking seriously something that seems banal. If you remember when I was talking about our ethnographic journal Number three, and I said, sometimes the best objects are actually the most everyday, quotidian, banal objects, like a fork. Anthropologists will often take moments or social institutions or events that seem trivial and show, in fact, how important they are, all of the things that they tell us about a society, and all of the actual important things that happen at, for example, women's parties. And this is, I think, one of the most important points that Menelee makes here is a point about space.

Speaker 1 • 19:05
It appears that she's doing work at kind of parties that are private in women's homes where women are chewing on a kind of stimulant called cot and are smoking tobacco. And one of her overarching points is about public and private space. Only from a male perspective, she tells us, can the interior of others homes appear closed, non visible or private. And so she says calling these parties, quote unquote, private parties is gender dependent. Historically, anthropologists would have called these parties private because most of them were male and most of them did not have access to. But for Mendeley, there are in fact a kind of public and a lot of very important things happen there. And so Menele says these parties are not in the private sphere. Women's social life in Yemen is not in the private sphere. Rather it is a public sphere that is separate from the public which men face.

Speaker 1 • 20:32
What happens in homes then? What happens in these parties? Okay, we're doing pretty well on time. So like you to take a moment, say hi to the people around you. What did we see happening in these parties? What were people doing? What were they consuming? Where were they sitting, standing? Were they dancing? Are they not dancing? What was happening in these parties? Take a moment, say hi to the people around you. And then I'm interested in hearing what struck you from this pretty fun. I think research.

Speaker 2 • 21:17
It's. It.

Speaker 1 • 22:49
What about over here? What did you notice happening? Have to think. Yeah,

Speaker 2 • 23:04
just like the stuff happens at homes, like their relations like space.

Speaker 1 • 23:08
And what was happening at the party

Speaker 2 • 23:13
I saw, it's like very interesting like the like relationship and how like these things that we like think is like so like ingrained in our mind about like what is place like they like social media construct kind of, you know what I'm saying? Like, like men kind of govern that. I just

Speaker 1 • 23:33
read that men have this separate space. Yeah. And so they don't come in to the house. Yeah. They ask before they enter. Okay, so I'm interested in hearing from you. So was just talking about again this interior particular space that is a public sphere for women. We hear about how men have their own public sphere as well. Before they enter a home, they ask, is anyone here? Are there women who are unrelated to me who are here? I'm not going to disrupt this public space that I do not have access to when I am beyond puberty. Very similar to Meneli tells us the way that women also do not enter men's lives spaces. But this lack of entrance into men's spaces was historically what anthropologists tended to see because they were men in the men's spaces. And so they saw women specifically being prevented from entering what they consider to be public space.

Speaker 1 • 24:33
And these anthropologists, these male anthropologists, did not have access to the public space that the women occupied. And so in this public space that these women are occupying, what is happening? Are they having fun? Is it kind of boring? Are people standing? Sitting? Yes, nodding. Sitting, excellent. Yes, people are sitting. There are different kind of places to sit, Right. We hear from Mendeli that she has to sit. She's learned to sit in a particular way when she first started her field work, people thought that she was uncomfortable because she couldn't sit in the way that they were all sitting. What else are people doing? What are they eating? What are they chewing? Did anyone notice the name of the stimulant that they're chewing? Yes, thank you. Yes, tell us. It's called Qat. Yes, Q A T. So they're chewing this stimulant, they're cleaning, they're being given kind of leaves of the stimulant that they clean and then they chew.

Speaker 1 • 26:03
They're exchanging them with other people, they're sending gifts to one another. So we were sitting on opposite sides of this party. I might send you some cod leaves that I have cleaned. You might send some back to me. People are drinking cola, tea and. Right. They're chatting, they're sharing stories. What is the hostess doing? Is the hostess relaxed? Yes, being super accommodating. And who is the hostess accompanied by? Is the one Hostess Gemmalia? Is she attending to everyone? She has like a hundred guests. She attending to everyone herself. She has other people. She has other members of her family, Kin, Right. She has kind of a wide network of kin who have come to help her properly serve. Serve these one hundred people, It's a lot of people. Has anyone ever hosted a gathering with one hundred people? Ten people is kind of a lot, right?

Speaker 1 • 27:12
Imagine one hundred. So this is. This is a big undertaking, right? And so we see that these are visits. We see that people are coming and that also when they come, they invite people to come to their homes. And afterwards as well, the hostess is receiving and will afterwards also be a visitor in the homes of many of the people, probably not all, but many of the people who are visiting her here. And we see that there is an exchange of goods, gifts, food and talk. And we hear from Meneli again, Bourdieu. Bourdieu keeps popping up for us that giving or squandering time is a gift. So the gifts that are given are not just material, they are also the gift of time. The willingness to spend time doing something that's quote unquote not important, just hanging out. Something that I think many of you could also probably see in your own lives, in your own friendships or relationships.

Speaker 1 • 28:36
We also hear about the high ranking participants in this exchange. Anyone noticed when they arrived at the party what they did mentally doesn't like them. A whole bunch, yeah.

Speaker 2 • 28:51
They asked about other people to move side.

Speaker 1 • 28:53
They asked other people to move so that they can all sit together. And what does Meneli say? Do you remember? She said they were kind of griping, complaining. They immediately demanded, they said that there wasn't enough, I think tobacco, kind of pipes of smoked tobacco. And so we hear that the distribution of bodies in space also at these parties can reflect hierarchy. And we hear that Jamila, a high ranking member of this group is sending out again these gifts of cos leaves that we were talking about. And sometimes she rejects reciprocation. When she rejects reciprocation, the party who has sent the gift, who is being rejected initially rejected, experiences that as a kind of diminishing of their status, as if they are not equal to Jamila, they are not able to exchange. And so this reminds us also from our week on reciprocity and exchange with MOS that the ability to return a gift is also a mark of equality.

Speaker 1 • 30:22
One of Meneli's main arguments here is that in these public spheres family status is being negotiated. Which is why when Jamila sends a gift of khat leaves to someone else who then tries to return the gift of khat leaves and Jamila says oh no, no, no, I don't want your leaves. That person's very upset because these are moments in which relationships are being performed and created. And when status is also being performed, created, negotiated, reinforced and alliances are being maintained, people sit together, people go over to speak to one another, people issue invitations. We hear that Anne Meneli received an invitation to visit a high ranking member, high ranking woman's home the following Friday. And we also hear about what happens after these particular events. This is from the end of the first section that you read. Every social encounter, Meneli tells us, is more than relaxation.

Speaker 1 • 31:38
There are always elements of confrontation, of conflict and competition. Each interaction is characterized by a sense of being in the public eye and an intense awareness of the fact that one's comportment and others treatment of oneself are evaluated and could potentially have consequences for familial reputation. Small incidents Taking place in these gatherings. Snubs, kindnesses, compliments, criticisms, and insults are always taken seriously. The sense that one is safest and most secure from the vantage point of one's own baits. Baits, meaning home, is evident when women return to their own houses after these former outings. What happens when women go home after these parties? Yeah, they're relieved. They throw off their kind of fancy clothes. They lay on a sofa. They tell the other people in their family, bring me tea.

Speaker 1 • 32:31
I'm exhausted. And then what do they do? Yeah, They discuss what happens. Absolutely. Maybe they unwind. You say they watch tv, so they unwind. They may do something that's not unfamiliar to us. They debrief. So again, why is anthropology useful? In some ways because it helps us see also things that we do with new eyes. I want to show you an example from the TikTok example. Unfortunately, I couldn't embed the video, so we're going to open it separately. We're going to hope it works. Just a second. Second. We have some time. Okay, so this is a debrief session. Spencer Hunt.

Speaker 3 • 33:31
Let's see how this goes, guys. Thank you for having me.

Speaker 1 • 33:34
This was so much fun.

Speaker 3 • 33:35
Bye. So glad you could make it. Okay, what the was that about? I know all she did was talk about her boyfriend, and when she started talking about all this, he buys her, like, okay, we get it. He bought you a Tesla and four chanel bags. Like, how many times are you gonna bring it up? Twenty two times. She brought it up twenty two times. I counted. Also, did you see the way she looked at me when she was talking about how long they've been together? I was hoping you would notice that, too. Like, okay, you've been with your boyfriend for eight months. It's not my fault that all my relationships don't make it past a year. Also, when she started talking about the new job her boyfriend got her.

Speaker 2 • 34:10
Yes.

Speaker 3 • 34:10
Like, okay, we get it. Your boyfriend is rich. You know what really got on my nerves, though? What? When I was telling you guys about the new guy I've been talking to, and she was like, which one? I know it would have been one thing if she was like, which one? But it was the way she said it. Exactly. Her tone was so condescending. But, you know, I do kind of feel bad for her. Why? Because all she ever does now is talk about and spend time with her boyfriend. And, you know, honestly, I think she tries acting better than us to make up for the fact that she doesn't have a life anymore, and we still do. Yeah, I do kind of miss when she'd come over, we watch a movie, hang out, talk shit, you know, actually have fun.

Speaker 1 • 34:44
And you know what's gonna happen the

Speaker 3 • 34:45
second her and her boyfriend break up? She's gonna come running to us.

Speaker 1 • 34:48
Right?

Speaker 3 • 34:48
She literally does it every time. Fucking ridiculous. At least we still have each other. Always bitch. And if I ever start acting like that, I give you full permission to run me over with a U haul, guys.

Speaker 1 • 34:59
Okay? Another example of a debrief session, Right? And so this is a moment also in which we see the creation of a kind of hierarchy. Hierarchy also of relationships. If you have a debrief session with someone that indexes a proximity or an intimacy that didn't necessarily exist in the previous interaction. Which is why we also hear that Ann Meneley is sometimes invited to these. She sometimes is entrusted with participating in the debrief session. After the kind of public party event in which status is being negotiated, people are being asked to move, to sit on other kind of sofas, lounges. Sometimes she is not because she is not a member of the inner circle. But also, she says there's something incredibly satisfying about participating in one of these sessions. If any of you have participated in one, which I imagine you have, it can feel extremely affirming.

Speaker 1 • 36:11
Also because it is affirming your relationship with a person who is having the debrief session with you and you are laying out what happened in the previous social event, the kind of hierarchies that were being created or changed, relationships that were being negotiated in a way that is very similar to what Ann Menelly tells us about. I also want to take a moment to talk about again how the body moves through space and how we see that here with Ann Menley's description of Adila, who she says has a very infelicitous way of behaving in company. A woman from the countryside who's married into a family living in the city of Zabeed and who does not do very well, does not make any friends, has been there for, I believe, two years and has no friends us. And so has really struggled socially. And we hear that it is in some ways about how Adila presents herself.

Speaker 1 • 37:24
We've heard about the habitus before. Right again. Pierre Bourdieu's idea of the habitus. How the body moves through space, how it knows to do certain things, greet people in a particular way, as we saw in our week on class. Shake hands, introduce oneself. The way we move our bodies through space is culturally shaped, even if we are unaware of it. This is what Marcel Most tells us. Pierre Bourgia added to that. Yes, it tells us about our culture and it also tells us about our class position within a particular society. I want to read this example from Most where he talks about this. This is from earlier on in the twentieth century, when he talks about his kind of realization that there are techniques of the body, that bodies move through space in different ways, and that there are some moments at which you perceive that there is some type of transformation in how bodies move, happening.

Speaker 1 • 38:25
A kind of revelation came to me in the hospital. I was ill in New York. I wondered where previously I had seen girls walking as my nurses walked. I had the time to think about it. At last I realized that it was at the cinema. Returning to France, I noticed how common this gait was, especially in Paris. The girls were French and they too were walking in this way. In fact, American walking fashions had begun to arrive over here, thanks to the cinema. This was an idea. I could generalize the positions of the arms and hands while walking from a social idiosyncrasy. They are not simply a product of some purely individual, almost completely psychical arrangement and mechanism. For example, I think I can also recognize a girl who has been raised in a convent. In general, she will walk with her fists closed. And I can still remember my third form school teacher shouting at me, idiot.

Speaker 1 • 39:21
Why do you walk around the whole time with your hands flapping wide open? Thus there exists and education and walking too. Another example, there are polite and impolite positions for the hands at rest. Thus you can be certain that if a child at table keeps his elbows in when he is not eating, he is English. So Marcel Mose is here thinking specifically about the arms and the hands. And I've given you an example about this before, from my own field work in Tunisia, when I often went to downtown Tunis, to the kind of market area of downtown Tunis. And I lived there for a long time, almost a decade, and people knew that I was American. They would greet me in English, and I could never figure out how it was, how it was that they knew that. And so I asked them once, I asked a vendor once, and he said, well, Americans have a particular way of walking. They move, they leave their hands a little bit farther away from their bodies.

Speaker 1 • 40:25
And also they make eye contact with people and they smile. And that's how I know. And so this is an example of how one's body gives information about where one is from. Or Amborgia would say, also gives information about what one's class position. And so I want to finish just by drawing your attention to Adila. We hear that Adila is very good at covering her body in the Zabidi way, but her mastery of Zabiti fashion was in contrast to her gaucherie in the field of zabiti manners, which remained unmistakably other. She greeted women she hardly knew with several kisses on one cheek, which denotes a warm and affectionate closeness. This speec feigned intimacy because Adila had no friends, right? Made the younger girls collapse into giggles, as did her lavish distribution of candies and gum from her purse. This is the province of the hostess, and Adila's actions had a peculiar infelicity.

Speaker 1 • 41:34
And so we hear also how there are particular norm violations that immediately mark someone as outside the the norm violation is so visible that children see it and laugh about it. And we hear how Adila tried to speak to Awatif, who was sitting next to Anne Meneli at this party, and Awatif immediately rose and said that she needed to go help. And so we see that there are strict rules around bodily comportments and also around hospitality. And mentally lays these out for us. Mentally is incredibly good at seeing how rules govern and help us understand successful a particular social event. And also have a violation of some of those rules, such as the incorrect form of greeting, a greeting that indexes closeness that does not exist, has costs and makes one an outsider. And we also see how there are rules for hostesses and rules for guests, but also that those hostesses in the rule following the rules of reciprocity will another day also be guests.

Speaker 1 • 43:00
Okay. Oh, I'll finish our final point again. The occupation of space, the sitting, the ability to sit together, the ability to sit on a higher or lower couch is also something Menele says that gives information about Zabiti society and about hierarchy in it. Okay, so for Wednesday we have a short passage from Michael D. Jackson, the anthropologist. We also have a short section from an historian named David Silverman. You do not need to read the entire PDF that is online. Please just look at pages one to ten. If you'd like to read the rest, you are welcome to I will see you then.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ethics, Representation, and Embodiment in Anthropological Fieldwork and Visual Narratives
Apr 10, 2026, 11:00 AM • 49 mins

SUMMARY KEYWORDS
Anna Tsing, assemblages, polyphony, embodiment, medical anthropology, ethics, photoethnography, representation, Bourgois, Schonberg, homelessness, heroin addiction, intersectionality, symbolic violence, biopower, Susan Sontag, photography, resilience, compassion, IRB approval

SPEAKERS
Speaker 1, Speaker 2

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Speaker 1 • 00:00
Is not specifically as much as one can from the perspective of a human, but in a way that puts the human on the margins. We tried to watch this. It didn't work. Just going to show you a few moments of it. This is from twenty twenty three. It is a kind of short video essay on the LA River. And this is an artist who was trying to engage with some of Anna Tsing's ideas, which we're going to revisit previously very briefly. So we'll just watch a moment of this. It. It's. Our next station stop is El Monte. If this is your destination, please watch your step and use handles when enter the train to the north. El Monte is our next stop. Okay, so how is this engaging with Anna Tsing's ideas? Right. We saw these very conceptual terms that Anna Singh gives us, her proposals for how we can decenter the human. And the artist in this particular clip is doing all of these things.

Speaker 1 • 03:02
The artist is giving us what Anastane calls assemblages. The artist is putting together things that don't necessarily go together. She's not putting them together for a particular reason. She's giving us something that feels messy. There's no, again, clear teleology, right? Clear kind of purpose driven narrative. We also see polyphony, so the overlapping interjection of different sounds without necessarily any kind of clear harmony. And finally we see a use of what Anna Tsing calls for new temporalities. We see the kind of overlapping of different moments of time in the story of this river. We know this because of the colors of the footage that we're given. And so we're not given a story that kind of feels like it starts and ends and we can walk away from it satisfied. So this is an example of someone who's thinking with these very conceptual terms that Singh gives us in a way that I think is actually easy to see once you see it.

Speaker 1 • 04:17
And so we're going to shift today to thinking specifically about the body and about this thing that we have been thinking about what we heard on Monday from Carol Adams in terms of her argument that in order for human animals to eat non human animals, the body must be disavowed. I'm going to think a little bit today with these very interesting questions that actually medical anthropologists study quite a bit. I know that some of you are very interested in medical anthropology and so we'll spend a little bit of time with that today. But we're going to be thinking about how our bodies mediate our experiences of the world. Often we don't notice our bodies until they suddenly stop working or they don't work in the way that we wanted. We also rely on our bodies and sometimes our bodies push us to do things that. We'll think about this in a moment, are perhaps not, quote, in our interest or that may appear incomprehensible.

Speaker 1 • 05:28
And so again, we saw with Adams on Monday this conception that she says Homo sapiens have of themselves, human animals have of themselves that we imagine distinguishes us from non human animals, which is our rationality. We are the so called rational animal. Human animals then. And she gave us the language that we use to create this impression. Right. Human animals love non human animals mate. Non human animals are imagined as instinctual and as irrational. Human animals imagined as rational. I want to just take a moment to think with you about that. How many people, okay, this is an old version of Romeo and Juliet. Who knows the story of Romeo and Juliet? Can anyone tell us what the story is? Just the broad outlines of it. Yeah, Excellent summary. So two families who are kind of arch rivals, their children fall in love and the love ends in tragedy.

Speaker 1 • 06:43
Right. How does the love end? In tragedy? Yeah, they both end up dying. Right. By their own hands. They think that the other. Initially there's a source, there's kind of a misunderstanding. One thinks the other has died and so dies by their own hand. And then the other does the same. Okay, let's take a moment to watch this trailer and I'd like us to think about this question. Are we creatures? Are human animals creatures who make decisions that benefit our self interest? A little bit of a dramatic trailer, but let's take a moment to watch it. And there's only one moment of text which I have included here. There are no subtitles. The strong will never fall the washing stars without you my soul cry Juliet. Sa. I would love it for you tonight. So this is a very interesting example that anthropologists not going to watch that again, would be interested in.

Speaker 1 • 09:11
Right. Homo sapiens imagine themselves as rational creatures. We create art, however, that dramatizes the moments in which perhaps our decisions no longer become particularly rational or particularly in our own self interest. Okay. Anthropologists are also interested in thinking about the body not only as kind of a vehicle through which we live in the world, a vehicle that again, sometimes works and sometimes doesn't, but also the body is knowing. And so we often talk about knowledge as something that is particularly cerebral. Right. Something that we're also doing in this space that we're in right now. But anthropologists and other thinkers, philosophers also very interested in these questions. Think about other ways that the body knows, other forms of intelligence. Melanie Challenger has a very interesting passage on this in her book that we talked about.

Speaker 1 • 10:21
The intelligence of your immune system is remarkable. The ability of your immune system to know the difference between what's not you and what is. None of that's a kind of rational, calculating intelligence, but it is intelligent and it's beautiful. The ability of a mother's body to sync with their child when they're breastfeeding, that's intelligence, but it's not the kind of intelligence we're placing on a premium, placing a premium on now. And we also talk about the body as knowing in other ways. We talk about intuition, feelings that something isn't necessarily right, a feeling that may be difficult to put into words, or if you've ever had the experience of returning to a place after a long time and still remembering how to walk to a particular destination, or if you play a musical instrument, remembering how to play a song on the piano or guitar years after you played it.

Speaker 1 • 11:17
These are all forms of a kind of embodied knowledge and thinking a little bit with medical anthropologists who are interested in the body, again, as vehicle and as. A mediator around which we develop a lot of ideas about how to maintain the body, how to take care of it. Something that we talked about on Monday in our discussion of diets and something that our authors today, Philippe Bourgois and Jeff Schoenberg, are also very interested in. How do we formulate a good body versus a bad or a broken body? Why does a body sometimes break or not work? We also talked about this with Cameron Hay Rollins and her understanding, her article about the American cultural script that proposes, as we said on Monday, that a good body in the contemporary United States is a productive body, sometimes a productive body at any cost. Something that Adam Grant, the organizational psychologist, also interested in.

Speaker 1 • 12:34
And so what do medical anthropologists study? They study, for example, how people understand that they get sick, whether there is a kind of personalist understanding there is an agent that comes from outside of the body that makes someone sick, or a naturalistic understanding, understanding that because of something that happened to the body, perhaps the body is out of balance and needs to be put back into balance. Medical anthropologists are also interested in the social framing of disease. Jeffrey Schoenberg and Philippe Bourgois are interested in this in what we read for today from Righteous Dopfine. They're interested in attributions of responsibility for illness, not just by people who observe the person who is ill, but by the person themselves, the ill person themselves. And anthropologists, medical anthropologists are also interested in how social scripts play into disease.

Speaker 1 • 13:44
Well, anorexia, a very good example of this. Fibromyalgia as well. Fibromyalgia being understood sometimes as a disease that is related to an inability to express internal suffering. And we often see this term intersectionality, something that a lot of people are interested in. Medical anthropologists think about it. But in ways that are incredibly interesting and are perhaps not exactly what you would expect. Anthropologists look at a number of identity markers that would regulate someone's ability to care or even their understanding that they deserve care or their knowledge of options for getting care. But these identity markers are not things that are necessarily easily knowable, quote, unquote, visible. Even though, as we talked about in our week on Race, for example, as Justin Garcia told us, many identity markers that we understand as self evident are not.

Speaker 1 • 14:58
Justin Garcia describes his own experience with that. But many of these other are also not necessarily visible. Whether one owns a home, is homeless or is renting, has a shelter, One's neuro typicality or neurodivergence, etcetera. Okay, so we're going to shift to talking about righteous doping. Our reading for today, we from two thousand nine. It's old now. It is a classic piece, a very, very famous piece. And we're going to talk about the claims that Schoenberg and Bourgeois make. And then we're also going to do a little bit of cultural analysis together of some photographs. Before we do that, let's take our participation check for the day. All good. Did everyone get it? All good. Okay, so what is this fieldwork based on? What do Schomburg and Bourgeois do? Can someone just tell us maybe about the opening arrival scene? Yeah, they live with and interact with a bunch of heroin addicts.

Speaker 1 • 16:54
Absolutely. So they're doing fieldwork among heroin addicts who are also without a fixed place to live. Right. They're actually living in kind of the underpasses of some sprawling highways in San Francisco. They call it Edgewater Boulevard. Is that the actual term? Is that the actual name? Yeah, it's not the actual name. Right. So they're. They are. They have anonymized it just like they use pseudonyms. Something that we'll talk about in a second. For their interlocutors. It is a very long fieldwork project. Why is it a very long fieldwork project? Probably because they live there. They're anthropologists. It's a project that they care about. Also because it was maybe a difficult Project to get ethical review for ethical approval for. And it was difficult, as they described, to figure out how to integrate themselves into the community.

Speaker 1 • 18:03
Their informants, the group that they are studying, call themselves righteous dope fiends. This is from the book. They have subordinated everything in their lives, shelter, sustenance, family, to injecting heroin, which creates a strong physiological dependence operating at the level of basic cellular processes after only a couple weeks of daily use. And these individuals, as we hear, were frequently on the move to avoid law enforcement and also to avoid encountering social contacts with whom they might have to share some of their heroin. Also, as we hear, these are also people who are coming from kind of day labor jobs, painting, moving furniture, getting kind of money to buy the heroin that they'll use for their next injection. So how did they do this? Fieldwork, participant observation collaborative. They did not use drugs, but they spent a lot of time with these people and also took pictures, which they provided to their informants.

Speaker 1 • 19:07
And they describe inserting themselves into webs of mutual obligation. They cite someone that we've seen before, Marcel Mose, talking about how one participates in a kind of moral economy. And they also talk quite a bit about the value and the importance of cultural relativism, which they describe as suspending judgment, understanding a particular phenomenon from the inside. They're a little bit anxious about this. What are some of their concerns? There are a lot of concerns. This is a very hard project to get ethical approval for from the internal review board of their institutions. What were their greatest concerns? Is this a vulnerable population? Pretty vulnerable population. Are they writing about something that's illegal also? So they're concerned about what they're going to do to their informants. They don't want to beatify them.

Speaker 1 • 20:28
They don't want to treat them as kind of saint like. And they also don't want to treat them as a spectacle. They also want to do the fieldwork responsibly. One of your colleagues came to my office, had a very interesting conversation about how one can respond in the field when one is asked to kind of reciprocate for an interview, to give something in return for an interview. This is what Schoenberg and Bourgois were dealing with on a regular basis. And they said at the beginning they made a lot of mistakes, but they came afterwards to see as mistakes. And they also said that sometimes their feelings got hurt. They had to learn not to take their informants, quote, petty financial manipulations personally. And they had to also refrain from judging them morally. And they take a Kind of jab at the internal review board guidelines. Has anyone ever had to get irb, what's called irb, Internal Review board approval for some for a research project.

Speaker 1 • 21:47
It's a very. Can be a very long project, a very long process, especially for a case like this. And so they make a point that the dogmatic rules, kind of bureaucratic rules, are sometimes out of touch for important research like this. And Schoenberg and Bourgois were also very concerned about drawing the attention of law enforcement. So they didn't want to put their informants in greater danger. And specifically, we'll talk about why they cared about drawing the attention of law enforcement, because it was part of what they saw happening. They also have representational concerns. We've heard these things before, so I wanted to draw them to your attention first. They talk about language. They tell us accents convey important socio cultural difference with respect to class, ethnicity, education level and segregation. But a phonetic representation of language can distance readers from cultural others.

Speaker 1 • 22:48
Does this sound familiar? Have we seen this before? Kind of conversation about writing, how people speak, trying to transcribe a dialect from earlier on in the semester? Absolutely. It was also on your midterm exam. Zora Neale Hurston. Right. This is from the beginning of the twentieth century. So Schoenberg and Brockeba, still dealing with the same question. They decide to try to preserve the grammar, but not the accent. They make a lot of decisions, which I'll mention some of the other ones. Perhaps you can discuss them. They're big decisions, but you have to make them. They also use photographs. We're going to think a little bit with photographs today. We hear from one of their informants who says, yes, you should take pictures. If you can't see the face, you can't see the misery. And we know that some informants also asked for their photos and decorated the places that they were living with the photos that have been taken of them.

Speaker 1 • 23:56
However, when you photograph someone and you publish that photo, you also make them potentially identifiable. Something that anthropologists, as a rule, are not generally supposed to do without approval from their informant. And certainly when their informant is vulnerable. There are a lot of ethical issues that can arise with disseminating someone's identity. And finally, the actual point that I find most interesting, the selection of scenes and stories. They tell us that in an effort to depict an accurate view of the fuller character of the individual, they removed, quote, excessively cruel or outrageously shocking interactions. This is a big decision. Is it a good decision? Take a moment. Let's say hi to the people around us. I'm actually really interested to know what you think about this. Do you think that this is the right thing to do?

Speaker 1 • 24:56
If so, why? Do you think it's not the right thing to do? If so, why? Just take about a minute, say hi to the people around you that I'm interested in hearing from you. Yes. I wasn't paying attention. I have no clue. Oh, well, Okay. So some interesting thoughts from the back of the room. I'm interested in hearing from you. Is this the right thing to do? What did you say with your colleagues? Yeah, I think it stays the same. Part of the work. They will be afraid of reading those things. For the other part, they may focus

Speaker 2 • 27:53
more on the true things rather than the problem itself.

Speaker 1 • 28:04
So in the sense that presenting. If you were to present all of these stories, then the kind of outrageous stories would be the focus as opposed to potentially the arguments that they make from their very, very long kind of field experience. I think that. That. That is their argument. Yeah. That's why they do that. I think that's very well put.

Speaker 2 • 28:25
Yeah. Need a good reason to remove those outliers, because if you're just removing them because you don't want to see them in your results, then that's just your own bias. You're trying to force people to make the same conclusion that you made. And I think that kind of goes back to one of the original things where they're like, you don't want to glorify this. We don't want to make a spectacle of it either. But if you're constantly removing things because you think, oh, we want to make sure that there's a polar character of an individual, then you might be getting rid of a pattern that might get,

Speaker 1 • 29:08
like, lead to a different. This is also a super interesting point, right, that researchers can't necessarily remove data without a very strong reason why. And as someone at the. One of your colleagues in the back said, sometimes the preference is to present all of the data, make an argument, and also let the reader make up their own mind. Also something that critics of this book have said. One of your other colleagues in the back said, well, this makes sense to me because this means that they're representing these people who are in the kind of current moment, addicted to heroin as people who are in this situation temporarily, but who are kind of fuller people that they got to know over a very long field experience, which I think is also their argument, that they try to see these people not through the kind of moments, very few outrageous moments, but through the many, many other moments.

Speaker 1 • 30:16
And they did a lot of research, right? They did like twelve years of research. Okay, let's look at their arguments. Thank you for that. Super interesting. I was very interested to hear your thoughts on that. And I think very good points that people supporting and kind of critiquing their position have made. So what are their arguments? This is one of the reasons that they say they're very. They were very concerned about drawing the attention of law enforcement and that their presence, that Schoenberg and Bourgoise presence at the field sites could be at the injection sites could be a source of concern for their informants who were concerned about being arrested. So they say fear of arrest discourages the possession of syringes. And this encourages injectors to hide paraphernalia in unsanitary locations. Relegates the injection process to filthy, hidden locales without running water.

Speaker 1 • 31:13
We hear about this, right? There's a photograph of a man who's being ejected into a vein and receiving an ejection in his neck. And we're told he doesn't have any of the kind of necessary paraphernalia on him. He doesn't have a syringe that's close, clean. So this is an example of an argument about the role of law enforcement and the fear of law enforcement and arrest. They also make an argument about the shift, the class position of the injectors. They call them the lumpen proletariat. And they tell us a little bit about why this is. This is a term that we have seen before. Proletariat. It's a term that Marx gave us in the nineteenth century, right? The people who have to sell their labor, not the people who own the means of production, the factories. And Schoenberg and Bourgois say that these are the people who are left behind by neoliberal capitalist development in the midst of kind of the retreat of a caretaking state, a state that would kind of fill in the gaps in one's life when one was in between jobs or moving locations.

Speaker 1 • 32:20
They describe them as the, quote, dropouts from history, the people who often do not appear in the stories that, for example, the United States tells about itself. And this is kind of a fuller articulation of their argument. The suffering of homeless heroin injectors is chronic, cumulative, and is best understood as a politically structured phenomenon that encompasses multiple abuses, abusive relationships, both structural and personal. This is one of the reasons that they say getting kind of into the moral economy of this world was so hard. As researchers, not only because of the structural, but also because of the personal abusive relationships they had to learn to navigate in an ethical way. Our exploration of drug consumption, domestic violence, sexual predation, interpersonal betrayals and interpersonal hierarchies examines these abusive phenomenon phenomena and their relationship to political, economic, cultural, ideological and institutional forces such as here they give us more information.

Speaker 1 • 33:34
The restructuring of the label market, the war on drugs, the gentrification of San Francisco's housing market, the guiding of social services, the retreat of the kind of caretaking state, the administration of bureaucracies, racism, sexuality, gender, power relations and stigma. They bring us back to some people that we've seen before. So I wanted to mention this before we shift to our analysis of some photographs ourselves. They bring us back to Pierre Bourdieu. We've seen Bourdieu before, right? In our week on Class. And we talked about habitus, this concept that bourgeois gives us about how one's body moves through the world in a way that is attached to class. Habitus we've called embodied cultural capital, right? How one knows to be in the world, how one knows to eat certain things and not others, to play certain sports and not others, to speak in a particular way.

Speaker 1 • 34:29
And we also get Femm Borgia, this notion of symbolic violence. This is, as Bourgois and Tomberg tell us, a system of mechanisms in which those who suffer or are subordinated are led to see their suffering or subordination as commonsensical and as a result of their individual decisions or character. So this is really interesting because it's not about other people telling those who are addicted that they are responsible for their situation. It's actually about the people who are addicted themselves, seeing themselves as kind of moral failures, seeing themselves as responsible for their addiction. And this is really interesting because Schomburg and Bourgois say this is also a means by which addiction is perpetuated. So again, they have kind of, it's a moment, a prescriptive argument here. We also hear about Michel Foucault, someone that we've seen before, right?

Speaker 1 • 35:36
We saw Michel Foucault in our week on the State. And we hear here about biopower, which other scholars have described as the management of populations as making some people live and letting other people die. What I think is really interesting in terms of Foucault here is something that we very briefly talked about in our week on the State, which is specifically about the nature of power. Power is a kind of capillary force that is, that flows among people at a very granular level, but that is Also about the ideas that people take on themselves. Again, this idea that the individual surveils and patrols themselves and they write. In Foucault's conception, power is not wielded overtly, but rather flows through the very foundations of what we recognize as reason, civilization, and scientific progress. Ideas that people have about themselves.

Speaker 1 • 36:45
Also reminiscent of Althusser. Okay, so for the rest of class, we're going to spend a little bit of time looking at some photographs. This is a photoethnography that Schoenberg and Bourgois give us. And so we're going to spend a little bit of time thinking with these. So this is from the UNHCR website. What is a refugee? What do you notice about this particular depiction? What does this photograph suggest to us about who a refugee is? Anyone want to guess? Yeah, Someone whose home country is in an unlivable standard, so they fled to another one. Absolutely. So people who are suffering, the people in this photo are not smiling. So there's an idea that there's like a story of suffering, there's a story of movement. This is also depicting refugees as women and children. Right. We're going to look at then, the stories that pictures tell, but also stories that pictures don't tell, and the potential cost of pictures.

Speaker 1 • 38:24
The people then, or the ideas that become unseeable or unthinkable because of pictures. Something that scholars who think about photography are very interested in. So very, I think, compelling piece by an anthropologist named Hilda Llorens called Imaging Disaster, argues that images of natural disaster feature a particular narrative. Widespread devastation, crumbling infrastructure, helpless victims. She has a very interesting article hyperlinked here, if you would like to read it, about the cost of these photos. And I want to take a moment to think with you about this. An example from the contemporary United States, Hurricane Ian in Florida from twenty twenty two. What are the differences among these photos? Love these photos. So here we have a photo kind of of harbor. We have the kind of pathway here that's crumbled. In the back, we have a hotel that rises above everything.

Speaker 1 • 39:27
Over here we have a shirtless man with gloves on his hands, with a fridge that's been taken out of his house, an American flag taped to it. Here we have people gathering canisters of gas. What's the difference between these photos and this photo? What's the story that's being told by Atia? That's super. See, I didn't even think about the American flag here. So there's kind of like an empowerment, a reclaiming of resilience in the Face of tragedy. In these photos and in this photo, there's no American flag. Very interesting, Very interesting point. And we have, like, real kind of dramatic destruction in the foreground of the photo. In the back, though, we do have the things that have survived. This gigantic kind of hotel looks like it's doing okay. And so what your ends would say is these are the type of photos that got published in the week of a natural disaster, not these.

Speaker 1 • 40:49
Even if both of these are happening, and your own says there's a reason for that, it's because these photos invite our participation, place kind of a call on us to care and potentially to help. These do not. They show people actually being resilient. But the exclusion of resilience also has a cost. The exclusion of resilience from the narrative about a natural disaster has a cost. I want to show you two very famous photos. The photo on the left, Migrant Mother. This is from the nineteen thirties, so the wake of the stock market crash, the Great Depression. And we have here a picture of a woman and her children. I'm going to read to you a little bit about this photo and this photo. Photographer Dorothy Lange took the picture for the Resettlement Administration. So this particular photo, a New Deal agency tasked with helping poor families relocate.

Speaker 1 • 41:55
It showed Florence Owen Thompson with her children living in poverty. The family survived on frozen vegetables and birds they hunted. The photo was intended to build support for social welfare policies. The photo raised some moral questions. While Lange, the photographer, shot to fame, no one knew the name of the woman. It was only decades later that Thompson was tracked down and agreed to tell her story. As it turned out, Thompson didn't profit from Migrant Mother and continued to work hard to keep her family together. As she said later, I didn't get anything out of it. I wish she hadn't taken my picture. She didn't ask my name. She said she wouldn't sell the pictures. She said she'd send me a copy. She never did. Thompson felt bitter, angry and alienated over what scholars called the commodification of her image. Thompson was the poster child for the Depression, and she did take some pride in that.

Speaker 1 • 42:51
Her photo benefited many. But as she asked a reporter, what good is it doing me? An interesting example of the stories that a photo tells. This photo was successfully used to raise public support for a policy that was intended to help people who were suffering terribly in the wake of the Great Depression in the United States. But the individual in the photo, unnamed, did not benefit from it. This is an incredibly famous photo. I remember when this photo was first published. Has anyone seen this photo before? Okay, a lot of you are probably familiar with it. So we're going to finish today by talking about this very, very troubling photo that's very hard to look at and that circulated widely because it was so powerful. So this is a nineteen ninety three photo by South African photographer Kevin Carter. It shows a young Sudanese girl with a vulture perched near her.

Speaker 1 • 43:57
It's an iconic image and according to the same article, captured public attention by focusing on the plight of children during a time of famine. This child here is actually crawling to a food station in South Sudan. And the photographer, Carter, Kevin Carter, won a Pulitzer Prize in nineteen ninety four, but he also received an avalanche of criticism. Although Carter scared the vulture away, he did not carry the girl to the nearby food station, and the fate of the girl remained unknown. In a critical essay on the image, scholars Arthur and Ruth Kleinman, who teach in Boston, asked, why did the photographer allow the predatory bird to move so close to the child? Why were her relatives nowhere to be seen? And what did the photographer do after he took the picture? They also went on to write that the Pulitzer was won, quote, because of the misery and probable death of a nameless little girl.

Speaker 1 • 44:58
Some others called Carter as much a predator as the vulture. Two months after receiving the Pulitzer in July of nineteen ninety four, Carter died by suicide. Apart from his own challenging personal circumstances, his suicide note revealed that he was haunted by the vivid memories of the suffering that he had witnessed. This is a very powerful, very troubling example of the stories that photographs tell. And Ruth and Arthur Kleinman tell us what is missing from this photo. Do we really think that this child was on their own on the way to a food station? This is a very young child. Certainly the child's family was somewhere around, But they're not in the picture. And so what does this do? This tells a very compelling story about how there are people, there are children who need help. This picture was used widely to get people to donate, to give money, to care about the famine in South Sudan.

Speaker 1 • 46:05
But at the same time, it does not recognize or inform people about efforts that pre exist. And so it can invite also intervention in ways that are not necessarily helpful. And at a very kind of basic level. It uses the suffering of a child to garner international support, but also to win photography prize, something that clearly the photographer himself was very troubled by, as he later described. And so these are kind of the background questions to the photos that Schomburg and Bourbon are taking. This is why they spend a lot of time in their introduction, thinking about why these pictures are worth telling or we're showing. And I wanted to just finish by giving you a quick look at what Susan Sontag, so not an anthropologist, but very famous social theorist, thinker of the twentieth century, thought quite a bit about photos and thought about the power of photos to tell stories and to shock and also the limitation of these photos.

Speaker 1 • 47:27
What is the point, she asks, of exhibiting troubling pictures? To awaken indignation, to make us feel bad, that is, to appall and sadden, to help us mourn. Is looking at some pictures really necessary, given that these horrors lie in a past remote enough to be beyond punishment? Are we the better foreseen images of past suffering? Do they actually teach us anything? And is it ethical to use other people's suffering to teach us something? She also has a very interesting take on whether or not the compassion evoked by photos is useful. Compassion, she says, is an unstable emotion. It needs to be translated into action or it withers. Sometimes simply viewing a photo that makes us feel compassion can make us feel satisfied that we have recognized this thing, this terrible thing that's happening somewhere else. And that can feel like enough, she says.

Speaker 1 • 48:29
And Choboerg and Bourgois are aware of this, and so they try to give us narrative alongside the photos. This is why they give us a photo ethnography and not simply an ethnography. So we have our takeaways for today. We'll start with that on Monday. I'm going to just finish by quickly reminding you. Ethnographic Journal Number three due tonight. Automatic twenty four hour extension. There are some extra credit possibilities that the MFA will post these all online. These are recommendations from your colleagues. You are invited to create a creative project in relation to any of these three exhibits currently at the MFA and in relation to class material. There will be more information on blackboard or to attend a piece of performance art called Nude Laughing. I really hope that someone goes to that and write something about it. Any questions, let me know.

Speaker 1 • 49:19
Otherwise, have a great weekend. I will see you on Monday.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Decentering the Human: Rights of Nature, Anthropocentrism, and Multi-Species Perspectives
Apr 8, 2026, 11:00 AM • 34 mins

SUMMARY KEYWORDS
anthropocentrism, legal personhood, rights of nature, indigenous perspectives, multi-species ethnography, Anna Tsing, Anthropocene, teleology, assemblages, polyphony, Kedi film, environmental law, Santa Monica, Mount Taranaki, Galapagos, Sarah Teasdale, insect apocalypse, human-nature relationship, ethnographic journal, decentering the human

SPEAKERS
Speaker 1, Speaker 2, Speaker 3, Speaker 4

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Speaker 1 • 00:00
Part of it that exists under our control and perhaps as a tool. I'll show you a video. So this is a child who's crying about leaves falling. So we're just going to watch this and then I'm going to think with you about how people. This video circulated a few years ago. How people reacted to it at the time.

Speaker 2 • 00:26
My trees gonna fall down and then I can long leave in the purple.

Speaker 3 • 00:31
All the leaves change color and fall down.

Speaker 2 • 00:36
Yeah, yeah, no, dad, I know. I don't fast. I'm sorry because you guys gonna fall down and then I don't reach you guys.

Speaker 3 • 00:55
It's okay, B. It's okay.

Speaker 4 • 00:58
I promise.

Speaker 2 • 00:59
I promise, dad. It don't make it fault. It don't be fault.

Speaker 3 • 01:06
It's okay.

Speaker 2 • 01:07
It's all my fault, daddy.

Speaker 3 • 01:09
Oh, it's not your fault. It's called nature.

Speaker 1 • 01:14
Nature. Okay. Has anyone ever seen this video before? Interesting. So we have here, right, A child who's saying, I'm really upset the trees, leaves are going to fall down. I didn't get to meet them. I didn't make them fall. I'm sorry. Tree leaves that you have to fall and you have to die. Why don't all humans think this way? Or do all humans think this way? Do many of us think this way? Yeah, Absolutely. So that's a great point, right? Many homo sapiens, the father for example, here, certainly me, in the way that I learned to think about tree leaves. I don't think about the tree leaves as something that is sentient. Right. That has feelings. Take a look at some of the ways that people reacted to this video when it was first very widely shared. So of course we could say not that many people said it.

Speaker 3 • 02:42
Right.

Speaker 1 • 02:42
Most people are like, oh, this is really cute. The little girl has an immature emotional connection. Right. But that would be kind of, I think, a standard reading. And this is because if we are connected to leaves, if we care about leaves, can we do anything in the fall? Would we be able to live? We would be grieving constantly. Actually be difficult to be so attached and to move about our lives, to live our lives. Another reaction. The little girl is so cute. Her reaction provokes a feeling of recognition in us. I remember what it felt like when, for example, I saw a tree and I wanted to touch the tree or I felt like the tree was a being kind of like me. Many people described this kind of feeling from childhood, kind of memory of an interaction with the natural world in which the natural world was experienced as something that was constitutive of One's everyday experience was not radically removed from it.

Speaker 1 • 03:51
And then other people said, yeah, this is actually how we should be. We should be thinking about the natural world all the time. We should be thinking about the leaves that fall. We should be thinking about the trees, how much they grow, the trees that have to be cut down. We should not be socialized out of our connection with the natural world. What does unite all of these reactions, I think what unites all of them is that they concur that the reaction of the girl is meaningful, that Homo sapiens are powerful, and that how we think about the natural world has important consequences. This is, we could say, a form of anthropocentrism, a vision of the world in which Homo sapiens are at its center. And we're going to think about that a little bit today. So I'm going to start by talking about our documentary for today from twenty eighteen, the Rights of Nature.

Speaker 1 • 05:07
And it looks at efforts in different parts of the world, right in Ecuador, in New Zealand, in the contemporary United States, for instance, at transforming the natural world into a rights bearing entity, right, giving it what many of the interviewees call legal personhood. And what is most interesting for our purposes about this particular documentary, something that we have spoken about before in our week on religion, and we'll revisit it again in our week on space, Place and time, these competing concepts of land and more broadly, of nature. So we talked about in our week on religion how some religious traditions, specifically traditions that we might call indigenous, but not only have an attachment to land as a vital part of particular pieces of land as a vital part of a religious ritual. And so the ritual cannot be displaced or moved elsewhere.

Speaker 1 • 06:17
It has to take place at a particular site because the land itself is part of the ritual. We talked about how this was often invisible to people, including judges, who had been, even if they were not raised Protestant Christian, they had been shaped in a world in which Protestant Christianity was incredibly powerful. And so they saw land as not inherent to religious practice. If you all remember this, we gave the example of the possibility within many Christian groups of kind of going to different churches on different weekends, for example, doesn't matter. And how that conflicted with specifically some Native American groups in the Western United States who were claiming to various courts in the United States that they needed access to particular pieces of land in order to accomplish religious rituals. And so we see here something very similar.

Speaker 1 • 07:13
We see competing concepts of land in nature, what we can call a kind of Western concept of land as something that is Owned, that is usable, that is in some ways inert, I think with qualifications. I think this would actually be interesting to discuss the ways that this is absolutely true. And also the ways in which this perhaps needs to be modified or qualified has certain limitations. And then also what we see in this documentary is broadly referred to as indigenous concepts of land, as something that is alive, that has agency, makes things happen, can want or deserve things, can need things, and that cannot be owned by others, or even, in some articulations, owns itself. And so we see some very interesting examples in this documentary. We see, for example, the Maori in New Zealand, or as they say, Maori in the documentary, who consider an excellent example of what we were just talking about Mount Taranaki as an ancestor and as they describe, care for it, not as a possession, but as a family member.

Speaker 1 • 08:29
So this particular mountain was taken by the New Zealand government in the eighteen sixties and given to European settlers who were moving at that time to New Zealand, who were settling New Zealand. So it was taken from the indigenous groups. And we hear a lot about that treaty, but in any case, it passed into the hands of European settlers, and so the Maori no longer had access to it. And then we hear about how in twenty seventeen, the mountain is given legal personhood. And we hear from a member of the Maori tribe. If you think about a mountain being your grandparent, it actually just starts with, how would you like your grandparent to be treated? It becomes quite personal. I think this is a very useful quote for us to think with. It puts together things that we often do not put together. Human family and the natural world. It also helps us test our own assumptions or presuppositions about the points to which our identification, concern and empathy extend, and also where they stop.

Speaker 1 • 09:56
We also see an example from closer to where we are today. From Santa Monica. We hear about a bill from the early two thousand ten S or an ordinance that gave gave citizens the right to bring suit on behalf of nature. Nature was given kind of legal personhood. And we hear about some of the consequences of that. We hear, for example, that a new well was not able to be drilled because it was determined that that drilling would violate the rights of an aquifer that deserve to exist, that had the right to exist. And so we see here very small examples of what one of the participants in this movement in Santa Monica, California, described as speaking up for resources that can't speak for themselves. And we hear throughout something that Carol Adams is also doing in her article. We hear people talk about the natural world, about river, for instance, about mountains in relation to people, different groups, different subordinated groups, including at one point children.

Speaker 1 • 11:12
And finally, wanted to mention this example from the Galapagos, so very, I think, interesting example, Galapagos island is very famous because Charles Darwin went there in, I think the eighteen thirties. And the natural diversity of the archipelago, of the archipelago was central in helping him develop his theory of evolution. Right. So it's kind of a world, a site with international, with global importance in the sense that it has incredible natural diversity and also helped one of the major kind of scientific theories of the nineteenth century and twentieth centuries developed. And there's been a recent discussion, we hear about this in the documentary, about how human migration to the archipelago and also tourism is endangering that natural diversity, that natural world. Some people are saying we need to prohibit this migration and this tourism or we need to substantially reduce it.

Speaker 1 • 12:18
And the way that we can do that is by advocating for the right of this world to exist. This is also very interesting, I think, example where we have, as in the example from Santa Monica, economic questions tied up in it, the ability of some humans to limit what other humans can do in relation to claims being made on behalf of the natural world. So kind of very thought provoking example of what articulating legal personhood or rights bearing status for the natural world can look like in practice. And so for any of you who are thinking about, who are interested in these questions of rights or thinking even about going to law school, very interesting, right? To think about talking about nature as a party that could be harmed and as a party that can go to court or have someone go to court on their behalf. As we hear at one point in relation to the case in Ecuador, people say, well, a newborn child can't file a complaint in court, but we still consider a newborn child to have rights.

Speaker 1 • 13:35
Same thing for nature. Nature can't necessarily file paperwork to go to court, but nature can still have rights. It is interesting though, going back to our conversation that we had just a moment ago about anthropocentrism, about the policing of humans at the center of the natural world, or I'm sorry, at the center of the world, that many ways this movement is about making nature like a person. Of course, for very important reasons, right? Giving status to allow nature to make claims, but it is about treating nature as if it were akin to a person. And so for the rest of class, then I also want to think with you about some other anthropological work that has tried to grapple with anthropocentrism by decentering the human. And this is specifically, I'll talk today about Anna Tsing, someone whose work I have assigned before. A little hard to read, a little challenging.

Speaker 1 • 14:39
So we did not read it this year, but I'm interested. I'll be interested to hear from you your thoughts about it. So her book A Mushroom at the End of the World basically says, okay, it's true that humans have irrevocably shaped the world that we live in,

Speaker 3 • 15:00
but

Speaker 1 • 15:00
can we try to study this world outside of the human as a human? Kind of a very challenging methodological question. And Singh uses this term Anthropocene. How many people have seen this word before? Anthropocene, okay, so for geologists, right, the epic in which human. The human disturbance outranks other geological forces. So basically the era that we live in, in which human beings have the world that we live in in radical ways. So Singh, working in kind of a similar vein as Graeber, capitalism, one of the primary accelerating causes of particularly recent change in the Anthropocene. And she has this question, again, a very challenging methodological question. She's very interesting to think with, just like Graebert, can we live inside and document this regime of the human and still exceed it? Can we live in it, but can we still move outside of it and think outside of it and document outside of it?

Speaker 1 • 16:21
One of the claims then, that Singh makes as part of this methodological, of this methodology that she's advocating, right, again, to study the world that we live in, but not by putting humans at the center of it, by trying to study outside of it. She says, one of the things that we need to do is that we need to let go of the certainty of progress. Amitav Ghosh, another anthropologist who also writes fiction, very interesting figure, has written about this. And he says we've kind of imagined the natural world as a stable setting against which human action takes place. Again, human action, most important thing, natural world, it's there. It's kind of the theater in which we do important things. And Amitabh Ghosh says, well, actually, maybe we can no longer assume that. And this is also a way of decentering the human, of thinking about the age that we live in as an age, as Singh says, of fragility.

Speaker 1 • 17:31
So she says we need to let go of the teleology that structures our way of thinking. I wanted to talk about Singh also, because I would like you to know what this word means, teleology. It is a word that you will see some of, you may know what it means, but it is a word that you will see in a lot of the reading that you'll do in different courses across the university in your college career. So teleology means the assumption of progress, the assumption that things are always getting better. It's actually a way of thinking that structures much of how we probably think about even ourselves in relation to our parents or the people who cared for us, our ancestors. And we also often think about our own contemporary world in this way. If you remember Foucault going next several weeks now, Foucault said this teleological understanding of history, the assumption that today we're more humanitarian in the way that we punish people, we are more humane in the way that we punish people, we're more benevolent.

Speaker 1 • 18:42
He says, I don't really think so, it's just different. Of course, arguable. You can argue with him, but he makes compelling points that are worth thinking. With Singh making a similar point. She's saying everywhere we turn we see teleology in our thinking. We assume that the world that we live in today is better than the world that we lived in before. We need to let go of that. We need to actually. Go out into the world, document what we see without an assumption that the natural world is a theater of stability for us, or that the future is something that that is certain and that the future will be better than what came before. And she says that this is important because it allows us to imagine the world outside of the human. And so she gives us some ideas about how to do this. Making worlds, she writes, is not limited to humans. We know that beavers reshape streams as they make dams, canals and lodges.

Speaker 1 • 19:59
In fact, all organisms make ecological living places, altering earth, air and water. Without the ability to make workable living arrangements, species would die out. In the process, each organism changes everyone's world. Bacteria make our oxygen, atmosphere for the atmosphere, and plants help maintain it. Plants live on land because fungi made soil by digesting rocks. As these examples suggest, world making projects can overlap, allowing room for more than one species. Some of you may hear this in another anthropology class, Multi Species Ethnography. This is what Anna Tsing is talking about. So I'm going to show you just another article from a kind of special series on multi species ethnographies that basically makes an argument for human beings thinking of themselves as co constituted by insects. The authors say this is actually a very interesting intellectual exercise because of all of the animals, the non human animals that we live around, the other entities that we live around, insects are those that we kill and feel very generally satisfied in killing.

Speaker 1 • 21:19
They use different words for this. They call it an insect apocalypse, an insect Armageddon. Many of them are killed, including, for example, in massive numbers by pesticides or just by daily acts. Right? You find a spider in your room, you might kill it. She says, or these authors say, little is known about insects, but they are kind of incredible. They preceded us, they will probably live after us. They are incredible survivors. They vastly outnumber us and our ecosystem relies heavily on them. We see our entanglement with them as well. When we use pesticides to kill them in large numbers, those neurotoxins also end up affecting human beings. And so we see the intertwinement. And so the kind of argument then of these authors is anthropocentrism is shortsighted and has also costs for humans. So Singh, Singh says, okay, how do we deal with this?

Speaker 1 • 22:37
What should we do? Singh uses actually some very complex terms to suggest different methodological ways of thinking outside of the human. She says, okay, we should use this term assemblages, which basically just means thinking about various living and non living entities that find themselves together. She says we should use the word polyphone to talk about sounds that kind of intersect, that are not necessarily harmonious, that are not necessarily coordinated. Right? A harmonious sound is a coordinated sound. It has a goal. Singh says, why don't we just look actually about unintentional coordination, the way that sounds overlap in the world. We don't need to make something beautiful or harmonious out of it. And she also says, let's think about new temporalities, new ways to think about time. Let's think about time outside of the human.

Speaker 1 • 23:47
And so different ways that we can see people doing this in different ethnographies. Also in kind of more pop culture books, very famous books, proposing that trees heal one another. You may have seen these books. Spiders speak, Pines find mushrooms. Frogs grow longer legs to cross asphalt roads. There are obstacles, of course, to thinking outside of the human. The people who are doing the ethnography are human. So we are limited, right, by our senses. We prioritize, as we talked about on race and class. We prioritize the visual, we use speech. We also put the findings from our ethnographies into language. And we also may be much more likely to pay attention to human like activities that non humans undertake. If you've ever watched a film, for example, about a dog, a lot of times the dog will speak or have some kind of internal monologue. That we have access to, we will imagine.

Speaker 1 • 24:56
Or if your friends show you pictures of their dog, they might show you a picture where it looks like the dog is smiling. Something familiar to us doesn't mean that the dog is experiencing happiness while doing that. But we often look for human like activities and it can be hard for us to imagine human action. What exists beyond human action? What is meaningful outside of what we understand and what we do to convey particular meaning. And so there are a lot of things that we could miss. I'm going to show you just as we wrap up some artists attempt attempts to do so. So we have here an old. So a poem from the early twentieth century by Sarah Teasdale, who died in nineteen thirty three, called There Will Come Soft Rains. There will come soft rains and the smell of the ground and swallows circling with their shimmering sound. And frogs in the pools singing at night.

Speaker 1 • 26:01
And wild plum trees in tremulous white robins will wear their feathery fire, Whistling their whims on a low fence wire. And not one will know of the war, not one will care at last when it is done. Not one would mind neither bird nor tree, as mankind perished utterly. And spring herself, when she woke at dawn, would scarcely know that we were gone. So, very famous poem. I taught a course once on the apocalypse. And we read this poem in there because it is about an apocalypse, right? It's about mankind destroying itself during wartime. About mankind destroying itself during wartime. And what does Sarah Teasdale propose? What will the natural. How will the natural world react to this, to mankind, to humankind destroying itself? Will it react at all? Ray Teasel says it won't even notice, will scarcely notice. So I'm going to show you an example of a video by someone thinking with Anna Tsang.

Speaker 1 • 27:28
This is from twenty twenty three. This is about the LA river, now mostly off limits, contaminated, guarded and policed, save for the rare moments when life refuses to disappear. The La river is an example of constructed, constructed human infrastructure that has been largely forgotten. So here we have an attempt to think with those terms that we saw from Singh. Right? Assemblages. So putting things together, not differentiating between human, animal, non human, animal, natural world, insect, et cetera, polyphony, sounds that overlap, that intersect without any particular coordination, and also temporalities. So we're just going to watch a moment of this and then we'll also see a trailer for a film about cats in Istanbul, which I know some of you have seen. Okay. Okay, let's see. Maybe we'll watch the Assemble One instead. Okay.

Speaker 1 • 28:45
We're gonna watch this one instead, but has anyone seen this before? Keddie. So this is a take on how to make a film in a way that decenters the human a little bit. How many people have seen Kedi? No one has seen Caddy. Really? Okay, maybe I'll sign this instead in the future. In the past a lot of people had seen it, but I guess that's because it had recently come out. Okay, so this is about stray cats in Istanbul from twenty seventeen. So think about again how this responds to Anna Singh's kind of very theoretical articulation of decentering the human. What is happening here?

Speaker 3 • 29:54
It. The things you say to me.

Speaker 1 • 30:56
I'd like to. Be un. Okay, So your reactions. How does this film decenter the human? How does it not stop decenter the human? Okay, why don't you take a moment, talk to the people around you, about thirty seconds and then I'm interested in hearing from you. It. Okay, so I'm interested in hearing from you. I heard actually some very good points as I was wandering around. Yeah, Such a good. Such a good point. Such a good point. Excellent point. Right, so we see the camera itself centering the cats, as your colleague was saying, and not centering, for example, the human beings who are petting the cats. Often we might start with a human being and then as the human being kind of bends down, the camera might follow them. Instead we're actually on the cats and the human being kind of enters the frame. Yeah, really interesting point. Other ways that humans are decentered, we as a humans are not decentered.

Speaker 4 • 33:30
Yeah, well, in a sense, perhaps the cats are humanized in a sense that I think. I think it's inevitable. But we do kind of project ourselves onto cats and our emotions and feelings onto animals.

Speaker 1 • 33:48
Absolutely. We project our emotions and feelings onto animals. Yeah, absolutely, Absolutely. It's a movie made by humans for humans. Definitely. Yeah, Absolutely. We have lots of humans right there. There are some cats. There is some cat. Cat interaction. Also a lot of cat. Human interaction. Right. All the cats have names too. Right? Like one's called the Hustler, one's called the Gentleman. Right. These are human terms. Okay, well, thank you for that. Just a reminder that you have your ethnographic journal due on Friday. I will be talking about some extra. Extra credit options, book clubs. Please do make sure to send your questions twenty four hours in advance. Remove your name if you are not going to attend. And on Friday we'll talk about these two thinkers and about the bottom. We'll see you then.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Exploring Food Ideologies, Animal Subjectivity, and Cultural Paradoxes
Apr 6, 2026, 11:00 AM • 47 mins

SUMMARY KEYWORDS
David Graeber, bullshit jobs, capitalism, food ideologies, Carol Adams, animal subjectivity, language and dualism, Cincy Freedom, Jonathan Safran Foer, Melanie Challenger, cultural scripts, edibility, gender and animals, ethical eating, emotional labor

SPEAKERS
Speaker 1, Speaker 2, Speaker 3, Speaker 4

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Speaker 1 • 00:00
Notice this is his argument. Bullshit jobs shouldn't exist under capitalism. Right? It violates capitalism self description. And bullshit job holders paradoxically get paid a lot. He says there is a reason for this. It encourages them to keep their jobs, to sustain the system in which they get paid a lot. And those who have meaningful jobs get paid very little. And so there is an inverse relationship. David Graber proposes something very interesting to think with between the meaningfulness of one's job and the pay received. And I wanted to show you some examples where you can think with Graeber in the wild. So we have here a video how I organize my day for maximum productivity in the middle. I get so overly anxious if I do nothing productive in a day. Like I hate myself so much for being lazy here on the other side. Why do I always feel so bad for having a lazy day?

Speaker 1 • 00:59
It's actually very much in the vein of Cameron Hay Roland's article that we spoke about very briefly about the American cultural script. But this also fits into David Graber's argument. Does anyone remember what David Graber says about this American cultural script equation of productive person with good person? Yeah, Absolutely. It's about the danger of having too much time on your hands, being able to think. This is what David Graber would say, be able to challenge the system. And so he says this cultural script is very convenient for the ruling classes. It keeps people busy, prevents them from questioning the existence of bullshit jobs. The entire system in which bullshit jobs exist but he says is the system of capitalism. So I want to give you an example of that. If you've ever watched these videos, David Graeber would have something to say about them.

Speaker 1 • 02:16
I imagine that he also watched these videos at some point when he was alive. Okay, so week eleven, we're going to be talking about bodies, humans, animals, subjects. Be talking about nature on Wednesday and we're going to talk a little bit about food today. So Homo sapiens have bodies. Those bodies need to eat. And we have, as we'll see in just a little bit, ideas about food that may not immediately be available or visible to us. We have a lot of social rights and social norms tied up with food. Show you a video. So this is, I think it's from kfc. Yeah, it's from kfc. So Kentucky Fried Chicken, a chicken fast food restaurant across the United States. So we're gonna watch this video. We might watch it twice. It's not very long.

Speaker 2 • 03:12
I have a cheeseburg for a free chicken sandwich. If you bring your real chicken. That's pretty Cool. I didn't know about that. No, that I don't. A chicken. That. That never fucking the hell out of me. A chicken sandwich for the chicken.

Speaker 1 • 03:38
Okay, we're going to watch that one more time. Did. Did everyone catch what's happening in this video? Mostly. Okay, let's watch it one more time.

Speaker 2 • 03:47
I have a cheese one for a free chicken sandwich if you bring your real chicken. Yeah, all fresh eggs. That's pretty cool. I didn't know about that.

Speaker 1 • 03:58
Animals don't even to be inside the building.

Speaker 2 • 04:02
No, that I don't. With chicken. That, that.

Speaker 1 • 04:13
Okay. How do you feel watching this video? Yeah, I think maybe it

Speaker 3 • 04:20
animal as

Speaker 1 • 04:21
materials rather than living being. So that there's a different treatment of some chickens as material and some chickens as living beings. I think that's absolutely true. This is one of Carol Adams points. Yeah, excellent point. What's really awkward about this? Or do you not find it awkward? Maybe no one finds it awkward. It seems normal. Yeah, it feels like the awkward thing is the violation of socially don't bring in shape. So the manager says you can't bring animals into kfc. And he's like, well, what if it's an emotional support chicken? But the point is there are animals at kfc. They're just all dead. Right. They're also non. They're also human animals. But the non human animals, right, they're there already processed. They've been slaughtered elsewhere. And so this is a really strange moment where the link between where the food comes from and the food itself is made explicit.

Speaker 1 • 05:29
People laugh. We'll talk about in a later class what scholars who think about humor and laughter tell us laughter does. But people laugh here. It is a moment that is incongruous. Right. Things that don't really go together suddenly come together. And so today we're going to talk a little bit about this thing that anthropologists would call food ideologies, which are basically ideas about what is edible, what should be eaten, how food affects human health, and also what foods are appropriate for certain ages or groups and cultures. Right. Groups within societies tend to have strong ideas about these things. And I imagine that you also have strong ideas and we're going to make. Try to make some of those visible. And I'll just quickly mention, you know, ideas about, you know, what makes your body stronger, makes your body healthier, also a kind of food ideology.

Speaker 1 • 06:39
Okay, so would you eat insects? Who here would eat insects?

Speaker 2 • 06:47
I.

Speaker 1 • 06:48
Okay, some people. Okay, would you drink camel milk? Drink camel milk? Would you eat cheese whiz?

Speaker 3 • 06:58
What is that can cheese.

Speaker 1 • 07:01
I would eat cheese whiz. Okay. What is cheese whiz? Like a cheese like tasting substance that comes out of a can. Okay. Generally many people eat cheese whiz, but this seems to be a cheese whiz opposed class. Okay. Would you ever have Coca cola with birthday cake? Raise your hand if yes. I actually find that really gross. Very common in parts of the world. I would actually have milk with birthday cake or water. This is also a food ideology. Okay. Would you drink a latte or a mocha after lunch? Yes, I do regularly. An Italian friend once told me that he considered that to be like eating cinnamon toast crunch, like very sugary cereal after having eaten lunch. Okay. Another food ideology. Would you have soup for breakfast? Yes. Okay. Some people, yes. Some people definitely not. Would you drink pickle juice? Some people feel very strongly about that.

Speaker 1 • 08:09
Would you dip peanut butter and jelly into chicken noodle soup? No. Okay. What about peanut butter marshmallow banana sandwich?

Speaker 2 • 08:20
Peanut butter marshmallow banana.

Speaker 1 • 08:24
Common American food. Some people are like, what is that common American food? Something that I eat occasionally growing up. I also ate a lot of sandwiches that just had cheese and mustard. Would you eat an entire strawberry including the top? Including the top, including the leaves. Disgusting. Some people are like, yes, absolutely. I did that this morning. Okay. Would you order pasta with butter and a hot dog for dinner? Yeah, some people, yes. This is often on children's food menus in the United States. If you've ever tried to order from a food menu for a child in a restaurant as an adult, you may have been told that you are not allowed to do that because those foods, they're cheaper and they are for children. Okay. So these are all our answer to these questions. Tell us something about our ideas about what foods go together, what foods are delicious, what foods are also healthy.

Speaker 1 • 09:29
And so these reveal food ideologies. We're going to talk in particular about the situation of human animals and non human animals in relation to this question of food. Melanie Challenger, a I believe philosopher, but kind of a social theorist who thinks a lot about human animal and non human animal. Some terms that we'll use today intentionally relations, wrote a book, how to Be an Animal, A New History of what It Means to be human, has a very interesting podcast interview that is optional on our website if you're interested in looking at it. One of the things that she asserts in her book, Homo sapiens have the particular privilege and burden of wanting and needing to eat other things that they know are living. She says humans or human animals are predators. With a rich moral faculty. And so this means that we are often thinking about what we eat, not just in relation to what is good, what makes sense, having birthday cake with Coca Cola, for example, but also what particular non human animals are especially good for us and what non human animals we may, for example, never consume.

Speaker 1 • 11:00
We're going to think about this a little bit today. I'm going to show you some provocative examples, some ways that people have really struggled to think with us. And again, when we look at examples that are challenging, that open a conversation, we often see laid bare our own ideas, our own assumptions that are otherwise invisible to us. Okay, so let's just start with this question. Human beings live with non human animals. Where do you see animals in your everyday life other than food? We're going to come back to the food. Where do you see non human animals? Yeah, Excellent. So you can see animals kind of grazing outside. So non human animals that are in a pasture, in a barn. Absolutely. That are kept as livestock. Yeah.

Speaker 3 • 11:55
On a park, see like squirrels and birds.

Speaker 1 • 11:58
Absolutely. In a park you see squirrels and birds. We often see squirrels on the BU campus. Yeah. What is that? Oh, it's a pet. Absolutely. Pets, definitely. Many people have pets. Yeah. You say pets as well. Pets are actually, I think, one of the most interesting examples because often people get the most physical contact from their pet. Right. There are rules around how much physical contact two adult human beings can have. They'll often get a lot of physical contact from children, especially young children. And from animals.

Speaker 4 • 12:36
Yeah. Like having a pet might not be the norm, but there are tons of strays that are.

Speaker 1 • 12:45
Absolutely. So. Yeah, very good point. Stray animals outside. So communities where that care for stray animals in common, for example. Yeah, very good. Yeah. Such a good example. We pay to go to places like zoos. When you go to the Boston Zoo, what is it called? The Franklin Park Zoo. Is that right, Tianyi? The Franklin Park Zoo. When you go to Franklin Park Zoo, do you see dogs? Now, would you see squirrels? No. Do you see pigeons? You might see pigeons, but are they on display? They're kind of wandering around. So interesting also to think about the kind of animals that we put in zoos. Zoos are often framed as a space for education, for encouragement of preservation. Interesting to consider, Right. What animals are trying to preserve, but also kind of a way of thinking about what parts of the world need to work on the preservation of endangered species and what parts of the world don't.

Speaker 1 • 13:53
Where zoos are located will often not necessarily see themselves as engaged in the preservation of species. Any other examples? Got some really, really good ideas. So here's some ideas that I had while I was thinking about this. Other places that animals show up. So we certainly had pets. Also had some other good examples I hadn't really thought of. But here are also ways that we use animals, right? Jewelry, stuffed animals as decorations. I believe my mother may have this actually at her house. We put animals on our clothes, some pajamas right here. We watch movies about animals. Many children's movies, movies and TV shows have animals as characters. I love this costume for Halloween. People dress up as animals. We have lots of brands that use animals in their logos. This is just an example from a YouTube channel that has an interesting video thinking about this.

Speaker 1 • 14:59
So animals show up in our lives in many places. Scholars would say, social theorists would say, Melanie Challenger would say we think about ourselves often through animals. This is not an unfamiliar pattern to us. Edward Said, scholars working out of the west often thought about themselves by thinking about themselves in relation to this place called the Orient. We can see a similar relationship operating here. Okay, so I want to give you an example from Jonathan Safran Foyer from his book Eating Animals. It was published a while ago. A very thoughtful book in which he tries to grapple with the presence of animals in his life. I want to read this excerpt to you. So despite the fact that it's perfectly legal in forty four states, eating man's best friend, which is a dog, is as taboo as a man eating his best friend. Even the most enthusiastic carnivores won't eat dogs.

Speaker 1 • 16:08
Dogs are wonderful and in many ways unique, but they are remarkably unremarkable in their intellectual and experiential capacities. Pigs are every bit as intelligent and feeling by any sensible definition of the word, they can't hop into the back of a Volvo. But they can fetch, run and play, be mischievous and reciprocate affection. So why don't they get to curl up by the fire? Why can't they at least be spared being tossed on the fire? Our taboo against dog eating says something about dogs and a great deal about us. And this is a saying. The French, who love their dogs, sometimes eat their horses. The Spanish, who love their horses, sometimes eat their cows. The Indians who love their cows, sometimes eat their dogs. So we see here different perspectives on what kind of animals are edible and what kind of animals are not. So who's right? Saffron Foyer says, what might be the reasons to exclude canine from the menu?

Speaker 1 • 17:08
The selective carnivore, meaning the carnivore who eats some animals and not others says, okay, well, we don't eat dogs because we don't eat companion animals. Saffron Fora says, okay, but dogs aren't kept as companions in places they are eaten. And what about our petless neighbors? Would we have any right to object if they had dog for dinner? Okay, he says, what about something else? Don't eat animals with significant mental capacities. However, if by significant capacities we mean a dog, we mean what a dog has, then good for the dog. But such a definition would also include the pig, cow, chicken, many species of sea animals, and, and this is a very ethically slippery slope, as he goes on to write about it would exclude severely impaired humans. Then, okay, none of that works. He says, let's say it's for good reason that the eternal taboos don't fiddle with your shit, kiss your sister or eat your companions are taboo.

Speaker 1 • 18:12
Evolutionarily speaking, those things are bad for us. But dog eating hasn't been and isn't taboo in many places, including this one. Historically was not always taboo, and it isn't in any way bad for us. Properly cooked dog meat poses no greater health risk than any other meat, nor does such a nutritious meal foster much objection from the physical component of our selfish genes. Therefore, he concludes, the inefficient use of dogs conveniently already in areas of high human population should make any good ecologist blush. So this is a very provocative take on food ideologies, where Saffron Foyer is saying, we have strict ideas about which animals are edible and which animals are not. And he says, even for me, he's like, I wouldn't need a dog. I actually have a pet dog. But I have to admit that it is a food ideology and that I am potentially inconsistent.

Speaker 1 • 19:18
He does, at various points in his life, eat meat, and he says, I have to admit that I am inconsistent in my way of thinking about this. Again, this is a kind of uncomfortable and compelling example of food ideologies. When we are challenged to make coherent the reasons for which we do things which are often in fact cultural but appear commonsensical, we're going to shift to talking about Carol Adams. We'll do a quick participation check. Okay, so we're going to switch to speaking about Carol Adams. For the rest of class today, we'll watch a video about one of the cows that her article is about. I do want to take a second. Let's say hi to the people around us. Was there any particular point I'm interested in hearing from you. I love this article. Sometimes students love it sometimes they don't. Was there any particular point from the article that especially struck you?

Speaker 1 • 21:27
Any particular example that especially struck you? Let's just take a minute, say hi to the people around us, and then I'm interested in hearing from you. And again, Adams is thinking about this question, right? How do we speak about animals in relation to our consumption of them, our ability to eat them as food.

Speaker 3 • 22:10
I just don't like her but I think she was doing too much. But I understand what she was saying.

Speaker 2 • 22:17
But like,

Speaker 3 • 22:22
Like, why do we have to be like this is how we treat animals. But also this is how we treat women. Like just make it about one or the other.

Speaker 1 • 22:28
Right. I get the point that it somehow felt like focus on this topic. But I think the point is that she's including other. Maybe it's more of like a bigger

Speaker 4 • 22:46
book that we just read a little bit.

Speaker 3 • 22:48
I mean probably the pages are like all the things we read are like page like six hundred, whatever. So

Speaker 1 • 22:56
it's all about to build up.

Speaker 3 • 23:07
I think it's funny though. Like people like, like personally I really care. Like I could see a dead animal still eat a dead animal. Like, like what do you think farm? Like I have cousins. Like they have animals. Like you look at the animal and like they name their animal. They still ate them. Like, like I could. I could associate. I could associate with an animal and still eat it. Like I don't.

Speaker 1 • 23:30
I'm not an animal lover. Like I really don't like. Idioms.

Speaker 3 • 23:40
We also I think like not being able like look at what you eat. Like soft as. No, but like I think the people just article is about. It's just like soft as I hear

Speaker 1 • 23:50
fat is more than my chicken's better. But that chicken.

Speaker 3 • 23:57
I actually if you have emotional connection to a chicken, that's impossible. I can see like a cow or something like a chicken.

Speaker 1 • 24:03
No, I. I can see that I can see a chicken more than a cow.

Speaker 3 • 24:07
People have chickens, but chickens like don't have emotion. Like cows have emotion. Like you can cows have. I said chicken stuff. What cows do.

Speaker 1 • 24:14
I thought you said you care for a chicken.

Speaker 3 • 24:16
No, no. I don't understand how anyone care for a chicken. Like I could see a cow like a chicken. Now like chickens are actually just like branded

Speaker 1 • 24:24
and see cows are women.

Speaker 3 • 24:27
So we don't actually.

Speaker 1 • 24:28
Okay, I'm interested in hearing from you. I heard some very interesting ideas. Different parts of the room.

Speaker 3 • 24:32
Cows was so dumb like that. Also cows are much nicer than

Speaker 1 • 24:44
China. Before making the packing dog people like they will save the duck that should be used to extensively amount of food and combine their movements.

Speaker 3 • 24:57
They should like make them storing more fat.

Speaker 1 • 25:09
Super interesting point. So this is very similar to foie gras with geese in in France and parts of Europe. So again the use of animals as a kind of tool or means. Yeah, That's a really interesting point. So thinking about animals as kind of machines, a denial of their sentience rate, imagining them again as kind of tools for use. So all things that Carol Addams is very concerned about. She's not just concerned about it for non human animals. She says it's also bad for the people who eat. Yeah,

Speaker 3 • 26:06
weird relationship with like speaking about my family manufactures. How I'm here today. So like it's kind of always like a relationship of. And especially like as I go into adulthood being more involved in the meetings and just how like you know, the animal, the life of the animals sort of out of the question of that space. I don't know.

Speaker 1 • 26:48
That's such an interesting point. Your colleague is saying that they come from a family that does meat packing, sausage making and so thinking about the language that's used to talk about the. We often talk about the processing of animals into food. Also use the word kind of commodify like commodities. Very interesting way to also hearken back to last week thinking about something that is could be bought and sold. Really, really interesting points. Yeah, something that I think is interesting

Speaker 4 • 27:20
is there's a sort of like moral weight that comes with when you know the means of production that go into an animal product but you consume it anyways. So products like free range or passenger raised language like that can make it feel better and best matched.

Speaker 1 • 27:43
That's really, really interesting. So my colleague is pointing to the labels often used to manage what we might call kind of. Adams is. I'm really glad you said this because Adams is very interested in this, the kind of emotional experience or weight of eating animals. She says we often have means of distancing, distancing or denying this experience. But it is part, she says of the experience of being an animal, a human animal that eats non human animals. As Melanie Challenger would say, being a predator with a rich moral equity. Any other thoughts? Those are all super interesting. Let's think a little bit with Carol Adams, then we're going to look at her article and I also wanted to show you her example of scentsy freedom. I'm going to show you an old news clip about scentsy freedom. So Adams is an ecofeminist, right. So she brings to this conversation Something that is not unfamiliar to us.

Speaker 1 • 29:00
Very reminiscent of Ordinar, very reminiscent of Simone de Beauvoir, people that we have talked about in the past. She's interested in how gender relationships intersect with human, animal and non human animal relationships. I think that you can accept that part of her argument, or if you are more interested in the human, non human animal part, you can also focus on that. This is part of her kind of ethical project. But primarily the reason that we're also reading her is because she is thinking about the need to identify how we talk about non human animals in ways that make us forget our own. She would say animality, our own animal ness. And we'll see how she overlaps with Ortner in a second. But she has some really interesting examples about language. I love this passage, so I'm going to highlight it for you. So again, she proposes to us, as your colleague was saying earlier, use language to.

Speaker 1 • 30:15
Adams would say, make the subject, the non human animal subject, disappear. She describes it as the disappearance of the subject. The. The fading away of the animal individual is about to be eaten. This system, she says, Adam says, relies on a dualism that our language does much to uphold. Because of dualistic thinking, right? A dualism, a binary got black and white because of dualistic thinking. Descriptions of human beings exclude the animal or animal. Like humans are intelligent, non humans are instinctive. Humans love non humans mate. Human cultivate friendships, non humans have affiliative behavior. Humans are humane, refined. Non humans are beasts, brutal, like the animal cut off from any association with a human. The animal like especially the body, is disowned. And so again, this is part of Adam's project. She's saying, look at how we talk about non human animals.

Speaker 1 • 31:28
It makes them disappear, but it also makes our own animal ness, specifically our body, which she would say has historically been affiliated or associated with women, is disowned or is disavowed. And I really like this example because I'd like you to think, would you ever use the word mate to describe two Homo sapiens? Would it be possible? Some of you are cringing. Yeah.

Speaker 4 • 32:10
In the uk.

Speaker 1 • 32:11
In the uk? Have you actually heard that in the uk? Oh, meat.

Speaker 2 • 32:22
That,

Speaker 1 • 32:24
that. That is absolutely true. You definitely got me. That's definitely true. To say mate. Would anyone ever say that two human beings mate using the verb? Kind of hard to say. I could imagine saying it about a human being who lived a very, very long time ago. Right. Like two thousand years ago. That might be possible. Talk about how Homo sapiens then mated. I think that's possible. I would never use it to talk about the contemporary moment. Never talk about a friend who is looking to mate with her husband or something. That'd be really weird, right? We do use it to talk about contemporary non human animals. And it's interesting to think about how we might use the word friendship as well. If you have a pet, you might describe that pet as having friends. And so it's interesting to see where we extend the circle to and also where the circle stops. You might not describe chickens that are terminal animals, right?

Speaker 1 • 33:38
What Adams called terminal animals, animals that are going to be slaughtered as having friends, might describe them as having affiliative behavior. And this is part of Atmosa's the mammoth effort, the monumental effort the human animals make to hide the subjectivity of non human animals in our culture. She has this very interesting example about the word meat. She's North American, she's talking about North America. In our culture, meat operates as a mass term defining an entire species, or I'm sorry, defining entire species of non humans. When humans turn a non human into meat, something or someone who has been very particular situated life, a unique being, our neighbor, is converted into something that has no distinctiveness, no uniqueness, no individuality. When one adds five pounds of hamburger to a plate of hamburger, it is more of the same thing.

Speaker 1 • 34:35
Nothing is changed. And in relation then to this meat, to, to this deindividualized non human animal, Adam says we assume the position again in kind of the schema that she's operating in, which is the schema of De Beauvoir and of Ortner, of the be the man subjectivity. We are told that we should, in order to distance ourselves from non human animal neighbors. And in so doing, we become unlocatable and un accountable. We know that these animals were once individuals. She says this is a point. I think people have argued with her about it, but she says we always know it. We just work really, really hard to deny it. And it's part of the subjectivity that she says is very costly. And so Adams, I think it's interesting to think about in relation to Ortner, because Ortner was interested in, in how this parallel between women and nature, men and culture, is difficult for women.

Speaker 1 • 35:44
Adams is actually concerned about the cost of what he would see as these gender norms for men. And so she's especially attentive to how this schema of the superior culture, the subordinate nature, again the same schema that Ordner has given us, how it demands something very hard of men. It asks them she says to disavow their bodies and specifically to disavow grief. It's an interesting argument. It's a moment where the article goes in maybe an unexpected direction, but I think her points are worth thinking with. She tells us there is a risk of breaking through every time a human animal eats a non human animal. We know that we could and can see, see non humans as subjects. And sometimes we do. She says, for instance, when an animal called pet dies, we feel intense grief. She has this very interesting example about Joan Rivers who lost her husband, saying the most difficult death in my life was actually the death of my dog.

Speaker 1 • 37:17
And she means it not as a diminishment of the death of her husband, but as a kind of honest discussion of the centrality of non human animals in our lives. This kind of grief, Adam says it's another part of her argument is animal. She talks about how CS Lewis talks about after his wife dies. He says his stomach hurts, he feels nauseous constantly, his whole body aches. Grief, Adam says, is a bodily experience. It is a moment when our own animalness is visible to us. And she says those who are required to embrace this be the man subjectivity, the subjectivity of superiority over nature and over the dominated other. In this case, the non human animal has to live in what she calls a violent paradox. They must hide things from themselves that they know are true. They train themselves to ignore and to see any slipping in of outside suffering as a failure of proper masculine subjectivity.

Speaker 1 • 38:25
So we hear about a cow called Scentsy Freedom. I'd like to show you a news clip. It's kind of old, it's from two thousand two and it is about the cow that jumped over the six foot gate at a Camp Washington slaughterhouse in Cincinnati. I'd like you to pay attention in this clip to help the people interviewed talk about Cincy Freedom. And I also would like to ask you, what do you think happened to Scentsy Freedom.

Speaker 2 • 38:57
At Willie's Bar and Grill in Covington? Tonight the cow is the subject of a rare discussion. One would even say her escape from a Camp Washington slaughterhouse was well done. Next it'll be robbing banks downtown. I mean getting away after all this ten fifty pound charolay is one camouflage cow. She wore out searchers today looking for her in the heavy brush nine news photographer Chick Poppy got just a glimpse of the girl, but she was too fast to get on tape, leaving him with a nasty scratch from a branch. I mean, had I been a mountain goat with a camera attached, I Probably would have got her. But look at this. I mean, it's downhill. There's so many. There's so many trees down, and it's like a jungle in there. The guy with the dart gun trying to tranquilize the cow didn't do much better. But these two UC students thought they might have better luck calling her.

Speaker 2 • 39:51
Well, at least they tried. After all, you don't see a cow

Speaker 1 • 39:54
wandering through Cincinnati very often at all. I mean, how can you lose a

Speaker 2 • 39:57
cow in a big city?

Speaker 1 • 39:59
Okay, how do we talk about Cincy Freedom in this clip? Anyone notice the. The words that are used to describe Scentsy Freedom. Call Scentsy Freedom a cow, which is correct. The Chevrolet cow. Anyone notice any other words that are used for the cow? Yeah, Absolutely. They personify her. Absolutely. They call her the girl. They call her she. Right. We get the riveting documentation of the photographer's facial injury. Basically no one can find her. So we get to see that this photographer injured himself trying to get a picture of her. We also hear an assertion. So we hear this cow being talked about in slightly human terms. Adams will tell us as an individual, she says in her article. We also hear this final assertion. How can you lose a cow in a big city? You don't see cows in downtown Cincinnati. This is interesting because we do see cows in downtown Cincinnati, or we see cow.

Speaker 1 • 41:45
I personally eaten cow in downtown Cincinnati, so I know many restaurants serve steak or serve hamburger, but there aren't live cows. And so again, we see what Adams would call this dichotomy. And this is a really. This is from the opening of her article. I really love this passage. I think it illustrates the paradox that she's pointing out to us. Well, Cincy Freedom, she tells us, jumped a six foot fence in Cincinnati in the winter of two thousand two to escape a meatpacking plant, and then, until she was captured, ran free in the city park for ten days. The day after Easter, she appeared in a parade that started, that celebrated the start of the baseball season. Now called Cincy. Freedom has a name. She received a key to the city as part of the city's festivities. She was then transported to an animal sanctuary to live out the rest of her natural life unmolested by meat packers, while many of the humans who celebrated her freedom headed to the ballpark to watch baseball and chomp down on some hot dogs.

Speaker 1 • 42:53
It's a very interesting laying bare

Speaker 2 • 42:57
of

Speaker 1 • 42:57
the two very disparate ways that many human beings interact with non human animals. And so Adams uses Scentsy Freedom story to Tell us something about the paradoxes of what we tell ourselves of our food ideologies. It's a little hard to read. I've always found this article very challenging. We hear Adams tells us about giving thanks to terminal animals again, animals that are made for human consumption. Consumption for sacrificing themselves. The only volition apparently granted non humans is a desire to die for humans. If non humans really wanted to sacrifice themselves for us, when then Cincy Freedom was given the choice between life or death, did she leap over the six foot fence? And if we are truly comfortable with the idea that non humans make this ultimate sacrifice for us, why was Cincy Freedom not sent back to the meatpackers after her escape?

Speaker 1 • 44:05
Why was she not sent back? What is Adam's argument?

Speaker 4 • 44:13
Yeah,

Speaker 1 • 44:16
absolutely. She became an individual. They call her her. They also call her the cow. She has a name. She can't be sent back to the meat packers. Right. And so she's part of this dualism in which animals that are wild, that show some kind of agency embody particular values that human animals are worried they themselves have lost. It's very reminiscent of Edward Said. The majority of non humans are seen, however, the negation of the wild as enslaved and powerless. And so shifting then to the conversation we're going to have on Wednesday, we're going to be thinking about nature and subjectivity and humans. Melanie Challenger suggests in her book the world is now dominated by an animal that doesn't think it's an animal and the future imagined by an animal that doesn't want to be an animal. This matters. This is also what Adams is saying, that rejecting our animal nature means rejecting the ways that the other non human animals around us and the natural world are similar to us.

Speaker 1 • 45:50
In fact, that we are not radically different at all. And it also entails disavowing or rejecting our bodies, which can have other consequences that we'll think about on Friday. Our take homes for today. Human beings work very hard to separate themselves from non human animal term that we are using intentionally. Human beings are in the challenging position of eating other animals. Most human beings, not all that have to die in order to let us live and decision about which animals to eat and which animals to treat, for example, as companions or simply as kind of fellow. What Adams would call neighbors. Think about birds. If you have a bird feeder, if you've ever been around someone who has a bird feeder, they don't eat the birds who come to their bird feeder, they observe them, they consider them neighbors. The lines between edible and non edible non human animals are tenuously drawn.

Speaker 1 • 46:52
Adams is interested in the parallels between the subordination of non human animals and other specifically in terms of gender, but not only and this, as we have discussed, is very similar to ordinary. For Wednesday, you're going to watch a movie. It is on YouTube. It is hyperlinked on blackboard. We are not going to read the Body Digital. It just came out. No one can get a copy of it. So we I've removed that from blackboard. And don't forget about your ethnographic journal number three, Focus on an Object, due on Friday. See you on Wednesday.

Speaker 2 • 47:29
Let me give you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Exploring Work, Identity, and Value in Contemporary Capitalism
Apr 3, 2026, 11:01 AM • 45 mins

SUMMARY KEYWORDS
Ibn Khaldun, Muqadima, capitalism, social organization, private property, self-interest, Protestant ethic, Max Weber, Calvinism, Martin Luther King Jr., Adam Grant, American cultural script, productivity, bullshit jobs, David Graeber, meaningful work, Barbara Ehrenreich, social value, resentment, work identity

SPEAKERS
Speaker 1, Speaker 2, Speaker 3, Speaker 4

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Speaker 1 • 00:00
An important forefather of the contemporary social sciences. And I think that this is a really interesting excerpt from his most famous work called Muqadima. So I'm just going to highlight some parts of this to you. Individual human being, Ibn Khaldun writes, cannot accomplish all the things that are necessary for his livelihood unless he has cooperation from someone else. He needs food, clothing, shelter, weapons, not only for himself, but also for his wives, his children, his servants, his dependent relatives. All the things mentioned are technical matters. In order to learn them, a man by himself would require a longer time than the time that he could keep alive. Without these things, assuming that he could somehow manage to live on his own would only be with great difficulty and trouble. He would not be able to obtain the various kinds of intellectual perfection that are the goal of humanity.

Speaker 1 • 00:56
Therefore, they said, man is political by nature. This means that he needs this kind of social organization in order to live, to provide for his own livelihood, to improve his situation in the world, and to perfect his soul for the next world. So this is an early argument, right from centuries ago, about why people live in community with one another. And the argument basically right, is that no one person can satisfy all of their needs for sustenance, for self defense, and also for intellectual and spiritual perfection. This is right in some ways. A class based argument perhaps, but it is an argument about the origins of society, that human beings must rely on one another for goods that they alone cannot provide. Moving right along to our conversation for today about the economic system under which we live in the contemporary moment, I've included this.

Speaker 1 • 02:07
We're not going to read it, but this is the imf's description of economic systems, specifically capitalism and socialism, two of the predominant economic systems under which Homo sapiens today may live. I'm going to be talking specifically about about capitalism. So I want to highlight for you some of the ways that the IMF and also that scholars, historians have talked about capitalism that will be relevant for us. The first right, that capitalism is a new ish system. It is now widespread, but it is in historical terms, new. And it relies on a number of tenets. It relies on the tenet of private property, that people own things independently on their own, they own land independently, on their own. And it also has a perception of Homo sapiens that is particular, that Homo sapiens pursue their self interest always, and that they compete with one another in a kind of natural state of human affairs.

Speaker 1 • 03:10
Many of these ideas actually appear to us now potentially commonsensical, but they are tied. Historians and scholars would tell us to the economic system under which we live. This is an idea that we've seen before with Gramsci, for example, that the way that we learn to think about the world in many ways justifies the status quo. We also see, of course, under capitalism, the importance of market mechanisms and of limited government. We talked about that a little bit in the past. So how do anthropologists, how do social theorists talk about capitalism, the system of conditions under which we live? I'm going to start with someone who is not an anthropologist per se, is a social theorist, sociologist, is very interested in the question of capitalism and specifically how we can square the fact that capitalism has arisen in places where Christianity is particularly strong, given that in Christianity there is an emphasis on the need to avoid excessive materialism and enrichment in this life.

Speaker 1 • 04:33
Very famous biblical quote that's often used in these conversations from the Book of Matthew. It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a knee, not a noddle, a needle. Correct. That after class the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of God. And so Max Weber has this question, how is it possible that Christianity did not prevent the rise of capitalism? How is it possible that capitalism has arisen in so many places defined by Christianity? And his answer to this is the Protestant ethic, his argument, and you will see this again, how many people have seen this already, The Protestant ethic, very widely discussed. So I did want to mention it to you, and I'd like you to be familiar with, is Weber's answer to this puzzle. Right? He says, in fact, one type of Protestantism facilitated the emergence of capitalism, specifically Calvinism, a kind of Christianity that believed in predestination.

Speaker 1 • 05:38
And he says Calvinism encouraged capitalism by viewing worldly success as evidence of one's chosen status, as evidence that one was predestined already to be saved. Right. So predestination, the idea that one is already saved, one's fate is already determined. And this was especially important, Weber says, at the time of the Reformation, which arose in the sixteenth century. The Reformation challenged Catholic mechanisms for ensuring salvation, which had to do with good works, also had to do with certain things that the Reformists decried as corruption, such as the purchasing of indulgences, very famously as parts then of this Calvinist Protestant ethic. Laziness was also condemned as a kind of impious acceptance of one's lot. And so with the Reformation, then we see evidence of one's chosenness in wealth, and we also see the valuation of all kinds of work, not just Priestly work, but all kinds of work as potentially sacred.

Speaker 1 • 06:56
I'm going to show you an example of that from our contemporary moment. This is Martin Luther King junior The civil rights activist. And this is from a speech in which he talks about a street sweeper. So someone who, who would be sweeping the streets, for example, of downtown Boston. Cleaning the street. Just one second. Okay.

Speaker 2 • 07:55
Streets like Michelangelo painted piece of fiction sweep. Streets like Handel and Beethoven compose music sweet. Streets like Shakespeare wrote portrait. Sweep streets so well that all the host of heaven and earth will have to pause and say, here lived a great street sweeper who swept his job. Well, if you can't be a pine on the top of a hill, be a scrub in the valley. But be the best little scrub on the side of the river be a bush. If you can't be a tree. If you can't be a highway, just be a trail. If you can't be the sun, be a star. It isn't by size that you win or you fail. Be the best or whatever you are.

Speaker 1 • 08:43
Okay, what do we see here in this conversation with Martin Luther King junior In this speech with Martin Luther King junior What do we see in relation to the idea of Max Weber? I'm just going to try to close this, see if it will let me back into my PowerPoint. Okay, great. It did. Yeah.

Speaker 3 • 09:08
Position or their characteristic in the world is aesthetic, like we designed the machine that will operate in themselves, but they are only operating their own way. So they think that the good way to show one's effectiveness to the divers, to maximizing their own effective maximum, their own role in their own pre studied position, rather than to change their position. Like you cannot change from a real to a habit. You cannot change to a small.

Speaker 1 • 09:49
Yeah, very interesting point by your colleague. So there is a kind of ennobling of work, right? Work itself is honorable, any kind of work done well. Honorable. And there's not, as your colleague pointed out, an emphasis on potentially changing one's work, changing what one does. Right. There's an emphasis on doing what one does and doing it very well. And we see this as a cultural script in contemporary America. There's been some very interesting work on this, including by people who are, for example, business psychologists. We'll look at an example of this. And this helps us think about this big question that anthropologists are interested in, including David Graeber. What is life like under capitalism? And so I wanted to show you some examples of Adam Grant, who knows Adam Grant. So interesting. No one knows Adam Grant. Okay, Business psychologist.

Speaker 1 • 10:49
He's at, I believe, the University of Pennsylvania. Organizational psychologist, perhaps, but very kind of prominent thinker about work, about employer employee relationships, about American cultural scripts around work. I wanted to show you some examples of some social media posts that he. So we'll take just about two minutes, say hi to the people around you, and then I'm interested in hearing from you. Is there one post here that particularly resonates with you that you think is particularly useful or do you actually find them not that useful? Does this. Do these not really speak to you? Do they not seem relevant to you? So just take a few minutes, say hi to the people around you, and then I'm interested in hearing from you. Back here. What do we think about these posts? The useful. Are they relevant?

Speaker 4 • 13:08
Definitely relevant. I don't know. I fully agree with some of them. I feel like your achievements are definitely part of yourself or I think they have to be connected. Personally, I don't know how I would be motivated to do anything interesting.

Speaker 1 • 13:20
So it would be like a question. Motivation and. Sorry, you said what isn't related. Your genius.

Speaker 4 • 13:25
No, you're like your job, but you're just achievements. I feel like your achievements have to be interesting, but I also like what you choose as an achievement in your life is subjective.

Speaker 1 • 13:37
That's really interesting. That's a really good point. Right.

Speaker 4 • 13:42
So I feel like picking the right achievements rather than like, I guess you could choose something that was more process oriented than outcome oriented and consider that an achievement.

Speaker 1 • 13:52
That's really interesting too, that you can maybe choose the different. Like what you call an achievement could also be recalibrated. That's very interesting. Yeah. And what do the rest of you think? Any. Any strong reactions?

Speaker 3 • 14:07
I mean, I do. I don't have any like anything against these posts because like when I read them, like to myself, like that is like probably true. Like for example, the third post that you've given us that he's saying that accompanying company isn't a family. Which is kind of true because when you're like always on the job hunt, you're trying to look for a better job with a better pay. Yeah. He's like talking about how parents don't fire their kids and we don't try to go to better families ourselves.

Speaker 1 • 14:39
Right, right, right.

Speaker 3 • 14:40
Basically and just go try to find better parents.

Speaker 1 • 14:42
So that makes sense to you? Yeah, that would make sense to you. Okay, that'd be great. Please share that.

Speaker 4 • 14:53
I literally can't read the board at the border.

Speaker 1 • 14:55
Okay, so some very interesting points from your colleagues in the back Section I'm interested in hearing from you. What do you think of these? Do these resonate with you? Are they interesting to you? They meaningful or are they not super meaningful? Are they in fact pedestrian, expected? Sure, yeah.

Speaker 3 • 15:24
Alienation that in the form that the morality is alienated is not very important. So is that accompanied the parents do not have learn something. And the middle one in the. In the down, it shows how can people oppose this type of inclination? Is that to fulfill yourself as a. A comprehensive person rather than a part of a very huge machine.

Speaker 1 • 16:04
Yeah, super interesting points. We have a great post. Accompanies and family. I will say my brother lives in Indianapolis. There's a coffee shop that espouses a lot of progressive causes near where he lives. And everyone who works there has a shirt that says like this coffee shop is not a family, which he was very confused about when he first started going there. But this is a position, right?

Speaker 3 • 16:26
Work.

Speaker 1 • 16:27
It's connected to this, right? Work is not your life. What you do is not your life. And so we have here this pie chart, right, that Adam Grant has suggested a better measure of what success looks like. Mental health, physical health, job title, salary, free time, liking what you do. He says this is different than what we are given, which is salary and job title, often the two primary measures of success. This is really interesting because it also tells us something about contemporary American society. And this is something that we've talked about before, right? We talked about this in our week on kinship when we talked about endogamy and how dating apps facilitate a kind of endogamy, specifically, as you remember, from your midterm, educational and class endogamy. And so we have, right, an article, these jobs will get you more matches on dating apps, suggesting that people select potential mates due to their job title, which again tells us something about the contemporary United States.

Speaker 1 • 17:32
This is from the Wall Street Journal. Very interesting article. Stop telling everyone what you do for a living. It doesn't tell us anything interesting about you. This very similar to what Adam Grant was saying, suggesting that Americans need to reformulate how they think about this thing called success. And I also wanted to show you some other work that has been done on this, again, American cultural script that is present in other places, but I think particularly in the contemporary United States, anthropologists have been very interested in it, which is the equation between hard worker, productive person, morally good person. It's interesting to think about yourself, think, is this true for me, is this how I think about myself? And it might be useful to reconsider that, if so, and I wanted to show you an example of an anthropologist who's at Miami University of Ohio who has written about this.

Speaker 1 • 18:39
She's a medical anthropologist, and we don't read her in this class, but we could. And she asked this question for those of you who are interested in medical anthropology, which I know some of you are, how do chronically ill Americans manage to make themselves still feel successful and feel okay when facing painful and sustained illness that may keep them bedridden for days? And Cameron Hay Rollins is interested in. In how the American cultural script, again, the script of hard worker, productive worker, equals morally good person, how this shows up in the actions that chronically ill people take. And she says they often still go to work and they get praised and admired for it. They send emails from bed, even if they work from home, they will dress up in their work attire. And of course, as an anthropologist, she's interested in how people make meaning, right?

Speaker 1 • 19:42
And she herself says, has said, I do this too. This is also part of how I think about myself as a medical anthropologist. Her job, though, is to also say, how does this cultural script work in ways that are potentially disadvantageous for us? And so one of the things that she points out is that sometimes following this cultural script actually makes people sicker. And we're not going to watch a speech with Stuart Scott, the. Is he a sports center anchor who knows who? Stuart Scott, sports center anchor, right, had debilitating, rare cancer, died right before he died, gave a speech on stage that was widely disseminated, a very moving speech about fighting to the very end. And this is an example of this American cultural script, right? The value that one feels in fighting against a debilitating illness. Chadwick Boseman, the actor, similar example, another example the anthropologist could be interested in.

Speaker 1 • 21:06
Someone suffering from late stage colon cancer, did not disclose this to anyone and still continued to film movies basically until the very end. This is another example of how the cultural script of good person, productive worker can give meaning to people, make people feel good when they are often facing something that's incredibly challenging, but also how it can potentially produce situations in which sick people maybe make themselves sicker. It's an interesting conversation. So we have our kind of takeaways right from our first, the first part of our class. Today we're going to shift to David Graeber. But again, we often think of ourselves in the contemporary moment through our jobs in the contemporary United States. This is something that anthropologists are interested in thinking about the centrality of work and our identities under capitalism, and also the equation of productivity with moral goodness.

Speaker 1 • 22:16
Okay, for the rest of class, we're going to think then about someone who's also thinking about what he would call. He unfortunately died in twenty twenty. He died young. He was fifty nine. But someone who's thinking about what he would call the costs of life under capitalism. He's especially interested in the paradox of work. And he opens his piece that we read today. We're going to look pretty closely at his piece. It's not very long, but I'd like to look at it with you. In the year nineteen thirty, English economist John Ennard Keyes predicted that by the century's end, technology would have advanced sufficiently that countries like Great Britain or the United States would have achieved a fifteen hour workweek. There's every reason to believe he was right. In technological terms, we are quite capable of this. And yet it didn't happen.

Speaker 1 • 23:12
Instead, technology has been marshaled, if anything, to figure out ways to make us all work more. We have here this opening puzzle. If technology has advanced to the point where we should be able to work less, human beings should be able to labor less, why are we not laboring less? And his answer is the title of his piece, right? Bullshit Jobs. And what are bullshit jobs? They are the jobs that pop up, David Graber would say, when we have new technologies that we think would give us a lot of free time. And we need. David Graber would say something to occupy a whole bunch of people. And so he says, rather than allowing a massive reduction of working hours to free the world's population to pursue their own projects, pleasures, visions and ideas. We have seen the ballooning of not even so much of the service sector as of the administrative sector, up to and including the creation of whole new industries like financial services or telemarketing, or the unprecedented expansion of sectors like corporate law, academic and health administration, human resources and public relations.

Speaker 1 • 24:42
Why are these jobs bullshit? David Graeber says, well, first of all, they're bullshit. Because it's not entirely clear how humanity would suffer were all private equity CEO's, lobbyists, PR researchers, actuaries, telemarketers, bailiffs, or legal consultants to similarly vanish. Many suspect it might markedly improve. Well, note this is a provocative piece. Right. When I was walking over here, I ran into another person who teaches in the anthropology department, and he said, oh, you're reading David Graeber. I think his questions are sometimes more interesting than his answers, but his answers are very provocative and his answers make us think. His answer here is, if all of these jobs disappeared, would you really notice And I think it's actually a very interesting question. I know a lot of people who have these kinds of jobs.

Speaker 1 • 25:47
Their lives would be affected by them losing those jobs. But how other people's lives, how the world at large would be affected, I think is not immediately clear. So if these jobs are bullshit, if there's no need for them to exist, and if you remember, David Graeber says, it's not only these jobs that are bullshit, it's also all of the jobs that pop up to try to help out these people because they don't have enough time to do the things that they need to do for their everyday life, such as dog walker or people who have like the mobile vans who come to these people's houses to wash their dogs in the driveway so that they don't have to go to the dog washing center. So if these jobs are bullshit, why do they exist? David Graeber says it's as if. He doesn't say it is. He says it's as if someone were out there making up pointless jobs just for the sake of keeping us all working.

Speaker 1 • 26:51
And here precisely lies the mystery in capitalism. This is precisely what is not supposed to happen. So again, David Graeber is taking capitalism at its word. He's saying capitalism is supposed to be efficient, right? It's supposed to have market mechanisms that guarantee that the jobs that exist should exist. There is a need for them. We have supply and demand. Why do these jobs then exist? This is a mystery. Sure. He says, in the old inefficient socialist states like the Soviet Union, where employment was considered a right and a sacred duty, the system made up as many jobs as they had to. This is why in Soviet department stores it took three clerks to sell a piece of meat. But of course, this is the sort of very problem market competition is supposed to fix. According to economic theory at least, the last thing a profit seeking firm is going to do is shell out money to workers they don't really need to employ.

Speaker 1 • 27:48
Still, somehow it happens. It's a very compelling puzzle. Right Again, David Graeber is interested in the paradoxes of the capitalist system, what capitalism is supposed to do and what he says he sees it actually doing in practice. What is the problem with the existence of bullshit jobs? I think that this is maybe for me the most interesting part of his argument because to me, anecdotally it is true. Did anyone notice what his argument was here? What is the problem with the existence of bullshit jobs? Why does it matter that they exist? Yeah, Absolutely. He says it's really hard to have a bullshit job. It actually really sucks. You get paid a lot of money, but you feel that everything you do is worthless. And this is intuitively true to me, which is always something that we have to be skeptical of because I know people personally who have these kind of jobs and feel very pulled down by the fact that their work is to them meaningless, contributes, in their words, no good to society.

Speaker 1 • 29:26
David Graeber says something even more. He says there's a profound psychological violence against the people who have bullshit jobs. So it feels really bad to have these jobs, but also it engenders having these jobs and genders a sense of rage and resentment. So Graeber also posits a kind of societal polarization that results from the existence of bullshit jobs. People who have bullshit jobs often report feeling miserable. Some report being haunted. This is from a sapiens article. By the knowledge that if their job didn't exist, it wouldn't matter or the world might be even better for it. So we have this mixture, right, of misery, but also of resentment and rage. We're going to come back to that resentment and rage. Let's take a moment to think about what the non bullshit jobs are. Per Graber, what are the non bullshit jobs? Yeah, like nurses, mechanics and garbage collectors.

Speaker 1 • 30:36
Absolutely. Nurses, mechanics, garbage collectors. He also talks about the London tube. So what we call the T in Boston or the subway in New York. Say what you like about nurses, garbage collectors or mechanics, it's obvious that were they to vanish in a puff of smoke, the results would be immediate and catastrophic. A world without teachers or dock workers would soon be in trouble. And even one without science fiction writers or ska musicians would clearly be a lesser place apart from a well tapped from a handful of well touted exceptions like doctors. Doctors paid well, important. If they were to vanish, we would notice the rule hold surprisingly well. And this is the rule. The more obviously one's work benefits other people, the less likely one is to be paid for it. And so what Graeber is pointing out is actually a really interesting paradox, which is the positions, the job, the kinds of labor that were they to disappear, we would immediately notice those jobs get paid the least.

Speaker 1 • 31:42
And the jobs that get paid the most are actually the jobs that were those jobs to disappear, we might not notice right away, we might not ever notice. And so we have this schema, right? We have the bullshit jobs, the non bullshit jobs, bullshit jobs disappear, no one notices. Or mostly no one notices non bullshit jobs, everybody notices. There's no teacher to teach your child at school, there's no nurse to care for you. If you are admitted to a hospital or you go to a doctor's office, no one collects your garbage. Definitely will notice that walk through the streets. Against whom then do the holders of bullshit jobs, of bullshit jobs direct their rage? Right. So we have, again, non bullshit jobs. Bullshit jobs. We have the societal polarization that Graeber is pointing to. He's saying the bullshit job holders feel miserable that their work is worthless and they feel rage and resentment against who.

Speaker 1 • 33:03
They feel it, we are told, against the people who have real jobs. This is what Graeber says. I will pause for a moment. Who thinks that Graeber thinks that he has a real job? Does he think his job is a bullshit job or not bullshit job? He doesn't quite tell us. I don't think he would say he necessarily has a non bullshit job. Maybe an argument to be made there. Right. But he does say teachers. He does not say professors. He says teachers. Okay, let's look at this quote. The very fact Graeber writes that tube workers can paralyze London shows that their work is actually necessary. So this is when tube workers, so again, the subway or the T in London, when they go on strike, they paralyze the city. This shows that their work is actually necessary. But this seems to be precisely, Graeber writes, what annoys people. It's even clearer in the US where Republicans have had remarkable success mobilizing resentment against school teachers or auto workers for their supposedly bloated wages and benefits.

Speaker 1 • 34:16
So again, Graeber, as you can imagine, he is an American intellectual, political progressive or was political progressive. It's as if they're being told, but you get to teach children or make cars, you get to have real jobs. And on top of that, you have the nerve to also expect middle class pensions and health care. Is a provocative line, Right? And again, he's giving us answers potentially hyperbolically. Right. With some intentional bold exaggeration perhaps, to make us think. And his proposal here is actually very interesting, that there is a simmering resentment against anyone whose work has clear and undeniable social value. The people who do work that feels worthless get paid a lot for it, but feel miserable about the worthlessness, the social meaninglessness of their work. And so they feel resentful against other people who have, Graeber would say, the luck to have work that is socially meaningful, that when that work stops, when the tube workers go on strike, everyone notices.

Speaker 1 • 35:27
Why does the system not change? This is a big question, right? Graeber's saying the capitalist system is supposed to remove redundancies. It's supposed to get rid of unnecessary jobs. And so Graeber says, well, the answer is not economic. If it were, these jobs would not exist. The answer is moral and political. This is going to sound familiar to you. We've seen social theorists who have proposed versions of this to us before. The ruling class has figured out that a happy and productive population with free time on their hands is a moral danger. And on the other hand, the feeling that work is a moral value in itself and that anyone not willing to submit themselves to some kind of intense work discipline for most of their waking hours deserves nothing extraordinarily convenient. We've seen this argument before about the American cultural script, right, that being morally productive is about being morally good.

Speaker 1 • 36:32
In the way that Americans think about work in the contemporary moment. This is a dominant paradigm for thinking about work. And Graeber says, well, this is pretty convenient because it means that nobody's going to want to work less. That thing that John Maynard Keys predicted earlier on in the twentieth century that people would, with technological advances, be able to work less. Well, that hasn't panned out because we have this cultural script. And this cultural script is convenient because it keeps people busy and prevents them, Graeber would say, from having too much time to think or to stat or to challenge the status quo. And so Graeber says, we have, therefore, a society that is divided between, he says, the terrorized stratum of the universally reviled unemployed and a larger stratum, larger than the unemployed who get paid to do nothing.

Speaker 1 • 37:33
He uses this term intentionally, right? Because he's using words that he says are often used against people who receive money from the state, who are part of the social welfare system, receive money from the state social assistance. They are sometimes described as getting paid to do nothing. Graber says, no, no, no, they're not getting paid to do nothing. Actually, this very large stratum. And they get paid a lot, and they're doing nothing. But the fact that they get paid a lot makes it hard for them to stop doing what they're doing. They feel resentment against anyone whose work has undeniable social value. But the fact that they are paid so much and also that they are so busy, they're constantly New tasks invented for them to do makes them identify with the perspectives and sensibilities of the ruling class, which, via how much they are paid, they're able to join if they were not already a member.

Speaker 1 • 38:36
Graeber is careful. He's not He's a sophisticated social theorist. He does not say there's someone who designed this to hold us all down. Instead, he says the system was not consciously designed. It emerged from a century of trial and error. But it is, he says, the only explanation that he can think of for why, despite our technological capacities, we are not all working three to four hour days. So as anthropologists, right, we see David Graeber doing things that we've seen before. And again, David Graeber, incredibly interesting to think with. He is paying attention to internalized ideas that we have about goodness, about what it means to be a good person, have a good life, and ideas that may be invisible to us, but that may. And we've heard this before, right? We've heard this with Althusser, we've heard this with Gramsci and our Week on the State internalize ideas that may uphold under which we live, including the economic system under which we live.

Speaker 1 • 39:38
We need to naturalize them. They're not necessarily normal, they are not necessarily a given. And we can ask if we agree with them. We might say yes. I've had extended conversations with students sometimes about Cameron Hay Rolling's or Rollins, sorry article about the American cultural script, productive worker equals good person and how that also gives people meaning when they are quite ill. I think that they're. That's a very interesting conversation, but the conversation is worth having. And by denaturalizing these cultural scripts or the system under which we live, right. We're able to see it more clearly and have those conversations. So I want to finish by thinking with you about Barbara Ehrenreich. So Barbara Ehrenreich, not an anthropologist, as you read in the very brief excerpt for today. So I just gave you kind of the opening of her book, which was published over twenty years ago.

Speaker 1 • 40:37
When it came out, it was very popular. She has a PhD in biology, but she was a journalist. What she's doing is very similar to what anthropologists do do. I actually first read this in anthropology course when I was in undergrad. And so Erin Reich, as we know from what you read for today, goes around to different parts of the United States and works in entry level manual labor positions, right? She's a waitress. She also later cleans hotel rooms. How does Erin rake and how do her arguments or her perspective support or contradict Graeber's thesis or potentially complement it? Add something to it. And before I hear your thoughts, which I'm very interested in, I will mention something that I thought was super interesting from the excerpt that you read, which is that Erin Wright points out to us in her work as a waitress in Key west how she derives satisfaction from what she sees as the meaningful part of her work.

Speaker 1 • 42:02
This is familiar to us. Right? She's an American. She is serving other people. And she tells us at Hearthside, this is the restaurant where she's working. We utilize whatever bits of autonomy we have to ply our customers with the illicit calories that signal our love. How does her piece for today fit in your eyes with what Graeber has proposed? Any thoughts on that? Do you find her interesting to read? She was interesting to read. Okay. She's very different. She's much more glib than the other people that we've been writing that we've been reading. Right. She's writing for a popular audience. Okay. To tell you what I think and then I'm. If anyone has any thoughts. I'm very interested. Grievers pieces about the bullshit job hold or the. I'm sorry, the non bullshit job. I'm sorry, Griever's pieces about the bullshit job holders. Ehren Eric's piece is about the non bullshit job holders.

Speaker 1 • 43:28
Is it easy to have a non bullshit job? It's not. Graeber tells us that, but he's actually not very interested in that. He's interested in telling the bullshit job holders, listen, you're miserable because your jobs are bullshit. They're meaningless, they shouldn't exist. He's not super interested actually, in what he calls productive workers. And so that's what Erin Reich is looking at. Right? She's looking at Benny, sewer repairman, Gail, her colleague, who is a waitress who's living with a roommate, also hitting on her. We have the stories of people who have the non bullshit jobs. And so we get a very different perspective. Perspective that Graeber admittedly, because maybe of who he's in conversation with, who he's writing about at the time that he writes his piece, doesn't pay a lot of attention to. Okay. So Ethnographic journal number three, due next Friday, automatic twenty four hour extension.

Speaker 1 • 44:32
You don't need to ask for it. Grades for journal two will be released. Released later today. There will be a study guide for the final exam. We'll have the same thing, cheat sheet, et cetera. And next week we'll be talking about human and non human animals. Have a great weekend.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Exploring Sacredness, Race, Ethnicity, and Class in Social Contexts
Apr 1, 2026, 4:31 PM • 49 mins

SUMMARY KEYWORDS
sacredness, Durkheim, social construct, race, ethnicity, class, Bourdieu, capital, media representation, Disney disclaimers, Orientalism, cultural capital, social reproduction, habitus, Marx

SPEAKERS
Speaker 1, Speaker 2, Speaker 3, Speaker 4, Speaker 5, Speaker 6, Speaker 7, Speaker 8

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Speaker 1 • 00:00
And appearing also in the notes. Any other questions that you have so far? It's fine if you let me think about it yet. You have some time. No question yet. Okay. So I'm always available on email topic hour. And next Wednesday I'm going to be. And also Friday, catch me and ask me if you have any questions. Okay, so we're going to do a short recap of religion that we didn't like quite finished last time, but we did most of it. And then we're going to move to our today's topic, which is race and ethnicity and class. And we have presenters and I just want to remind you. So the thing that we talked about last section in the galaxy of religion was the idea that Durkheim is in the. To look at the way that religion is built around sacred things. And I ask you, how do we know or recognize that something is sacred or if there is anything consistent that we can see between different sacred things?

Speaker 1 • 01:04
Remember what did we say? Like how something becomes sacred or what is the main thing that. Yes, they always put aside? Right. So Durkan tells us there is nothing inherent in the object or in the thing itself. It's mainly the idea that it's being put put aside. And how do we usually, when we say put aside, how do we actually separate it from the things that are not sacred? What are the things that we're doing in order to separate it? I think that you actually said it last time, if you remember what you said when we talked about the book, for example, like a religion, like a sacred book. Right. So usually part of the way that we are separating it is that we are called. I wanted to. To move to the next like. So we have this idea of like set apart. And part of the way that we're doing it is actually creating a lot of rules around it. Creating something that like all kinds of regulations that creates this object or this thing as distinct from any other thing.

Speaker 1 • 02:02
So a holy book or a sacred book is different than any other book, not because something in the papers of the book are different, but just because we treat it differently. So it can be an object, so it can be like literal object or it can be even an animal, as I gave you the example of the cow in Hinduism. It can be a practice. It can be practice that usually practices are already included in some of it. So if you think about baptism, so the water is sacred, but nothing in the water obviously is different than any kind of water. It's not that something is in the water itself, but the reason that we are like creating this sacredness is through the idea of the context that we use it specifically is different. Right. The moment we're doing this baptism, we're immediately making the water different. And because it's not like any other water, the same with time.

Speaker 1 • 02:59
If you think about almost like all religions have changed the time. It can holidays, it can be weekly time. So like Saturday for Jews and like Sunday for Christians and Friday for Muslims. It could be placed some, I gave like example close to home, which is a place that is sacred for three different religions. And then it's like creating a lot of conflicts as well. So all these things are being sacred because they are not the same as other people. So this day is not the same as any other day. Like for this obviously how in different day a sheep or than a pig or than any other kind of animal that might be seen similar. So that what we talked in general in the last, in the ending of last section. And I want to ask you before we move on to like something else. Oh, first of all, do you have any questions about this idea? No. Okay, so I want to ask you before we move on to the topic of today, if you think about these ideas, objects, shrines, place, practice that are sacred also in non religious context, is it only religion that creates this kind of like holiness and sacredness around specific objects, signs, places.

Speaker 1 • 04:14
So I see some faces nodding, some not responding, some in their phone. What do you think? Let me hear you.

Speaker 2 • 04:31
It could just be like a really historical place, like there's like areas of the city that are like designated like oh, you can't build new developments here and stuff.

Speaker 1 • 04:42
Right. So what usually creates this kind of like it's a place you cannot like ruin, for example. Or like I think about archaeology, for example. So I don't know anything about archaeology, but I have friends who are archaeologists and I know that there are some places you cannot dig. Right. So what usually creates this kind of like what makes those places that you're talking about sacred? Or like what creates these distinctions and regulations? Yes. And then Danny.

Speaker 3 • 05:07
And then I think the ceremony that the graduation ceremony is the great. Undergraduate student or even the graduate student symbolize that you successfully end a period of your life and your giant certain title, Ideal Pride.

Speaker 1 • 05:34
Yeah. So, okay, so science is telling us like some places have significance through histories or stories that we tell about the specific places. And you're also telling us that there is, we can think about different examples of life events that are becoming sacred even if they're not religious, but we still consider Them sacred because they signify something in life. Right. In our culture, in our society, we have something significant that we bring into a wedding and a funeral and we are not thinking about, I don't know, the first time we ate tuna. Something that's random, that happens, events happen. But not all of them are being significantly mentioned or being celebrated. But there are some things that we put the side. Or this thing. Yeah, great.

Speaker 4 • 06:17
I'll just say that like in the community is there's always very old buildings or other objects that like statues or whatever that been. There's a store. You can't like like if you're trying to develop land like you can't like do it on that land just because it's causes like. Like outrage. I feel like. So I feel like if that's like

Speaker 1 • 06:40
the case that just.

Speaker 4 • 06:40
Just a non religious content.

Speaker 3 • 06:43
Right.

Speaker 1 • 06:43
So I'm trying to think about examples from. So there is like movies that I don't. I'm trying to find out which movie I'm like I have in my mind. But I don't remember. But I do remember that I like. So there is like a movie or TV show in which people are like fighting on. Like usually it's courts tv. Like I don't know if you watch like Law and Order and kind of this kind of stuff. But they're like somebody who's trying to destroy a building or a place and then there is like a big trial and people are trying to fight and usually when people are trying to fight and I'm trying to connect a little bit of what you both said in order to sell it as a place that cannot be destroyed, you cannot just say it's a nice building or you have to create something unique about it. And usually it's done through this kind of like narrative that explain why these places has any kind of other significance.

Speaker 1 • 07:35
So I think that yeah, maybe, yeah,

Speaker 5 • 07:38
you want to say just because I feel like there weren't any objects that we talked about. But also I think that tradition is really important. It doesn't have to be a religious tradition. And so it can be kind of like random and then take on meaning afterwards. I'm personally thinking about in one of the clubs I did in high school we had a mentor who I was very close to and he was

Speaker 6 • 08:08
very

Speaker 5 • 08:08
fun and goofy and silly and it was like pretty big stage for his films. And one of the things he started doing was every year there was like the Golden Hammer Award. It was just a spray painted golden hammer that you would give to someone but then he got into a tragic accident and he died. And so now we have all of these little golden hammers all around as a way to remember him. So it started off as something that he just started for fun. There wasn't really any, like, reason that it was any more important, but it was still a sacred, like, kind of sacred item at that point, just because

Speaker 6 • 08:41
it was, like, different.

Speaker 5 • 08:43
And then after he died, it kind of took on another meaning of. Yes, it took on another meaning of also being, like, a symbol of remembering.

Speaker 1 • 08:55
Right. So you're giving us an example which is like, pointing to the fact that some things become sacred to some group of people or some individual, because it has some, like, sentimental meaning, that it may be only for this kind of group of people. Right. If I would come as a new member and, like, see this object, it won't be sacred at all because I'm not sharing this community. Community of, like, remembering somebody who is, like, who passed away. So I think that, like, all the things that you said are correct, and all of them point to the idea that sacredness is not only based on the idea that, like, it's set aside as something different or more unique or more important that we have to honor in a certain way, but it also points to certain communities. So even the example of buildings or things that we have to ruin and we have to defend are usually in a group, like, the narrative that is creating some spaces that's important to defend.

Speaker 1 • 09:50
Do you say defend, or would you say protect? Maybe protect is a better word for it. Protect. It's usually important to a group of people who have some history and connection to it. And also the ceremony, so the graduate ceremony, it cannot be something like events in life cannot become sacred unless it's part of a group who celebrates it. And it's like, it has a lot of, like, meaning within the group itself. And I think that a good example is, like, if you think about, like, nationality and if you think about, like, national, like, symbols or, like, different kinds of things that represent the nation, I usually have a lot of different sacred things. So the. The anthem is usually becoming kind of a sacred thing. The flag is one amazing example. So it's obviously, nothing is important in the fabric itself, right, in the flag. But there is a lot of significance in the idea of, like, somebody's burning the flag.

Speaker 1 • 10:49
It's a very big deal, right? It's not something that people just treat us like burning any other kind of fabric. So there is an example. So now there is actually a law that says that There is like a higher persecuting elements of like burning the American flag, the Trump, but also like when people like broke to the capital. I think that one of the ideas that create such a, like, regardless of the, like the technical elements of this specific event and what it creates, I think it also signifies something much bigger. Right. When people talked about it, it was more than just a security event or some historical event that had meaning because it's a big deal. It's also a big deal because it represents something about democracy, something about the US Something about, I don't know, like reality. So people are creating a lot of significance within a national narrative.

Speaker 1 • 11:45
And I think it's a very good example to see how things become stable. Group of people. Any other final thoughts before we move to the next topic of today? Yes.

Speaker 3 • 12:00
Like some phrase to memorize. Some heroic people. Like

Speaker 1 • 12:09
memorization. Yeah. Right. So, yeah, that's obviously an example that speaks into this category. Right. So the idea that like this stone becomes something much more than actual stone or this. It depends like how you memorize. I invented stone because I don't know that maybe Berlin there is like this huge memorization that are mainly stones, but also sometimes small memorizations. Yes. So that's also for example. Okay, so without further ado, I'm going to invite the group that are going to do the cultural artifact for the day and we're going to talk about race, ethnicity. So the group come forward and just tell us what we see here and what you wanted to say about it. Like, I know what you think. The rest of you know the context.

Speaker 6 • 13:04
Hey guys. So what we see on the board is at this client that we see in some of the old Disney movies and it's featured on Disney plus. So it's a disclaimer about outdated cultural depictions and stereotypes. And it basically acknowledges that these portrayals back in the day were harmful. They were wrong and they still are. But instead Disney came up with this strategy to sort of work this their way around removing the movies. And instead of that, they framed it as something to learn from and spark cultural conversations about it. These disclaimers were introduced in two thousand nine when the platform was first launched, but then they updated it to a stronger, more explicit warning in twenty twenty. Twenty twenty. Given the cultural sort of discussions and events that was going wrong going around back in the day, and the movies that these disclaimer show, specifically Dumbo, Peter Pan, the Aristocrats, lady and the Tramp, as well as Aladdin, all these movies sort of depicted had wrong cultural depictions and they sort of reinforce some stereotypes that will that are considered as wrong in our current day.

Speaker 6 • 14:29
However, as of early twenty twenty five, Disney removed these unskippable disclaimers from the shows, and instead they updated the movie descriptions as well as they reworked the phrasing so it's less. It's more subtle now. And it was related to a change in Disney's DEI policy, which is now centered around acknowledging each movie's cultural context specifically, which sort of raise concerns and controversy and spark conversations about whether it's right to do or not.

Speaker 7 • 15:03
I thought this was really interesting. I hadn't actually heard of this happening until I started working on this, but it kind of made me think about ideas from here in Bordeaux when I was thinking about it. And I think it brings up questions about considered the dominant culture that decides what's entertaining, what's like, funny. Because a lot of these warnings are about, like, harmful stereotypes. You've seen Peter Pan, it's about the indigenous people. Like, that's why the warning's in there. I think it's just like an interesting idea about who decides these things and then also who has the power to challenge these ideas. So obviously March and marginalized communities didn't have the same whether these were included in the original content or not. I also think that through these messages, the dominant culture gets to acknowledge harm just enough to seem responsible.

Speaker 7 • 16:00
But we also see that the concept is just like kept up. So it's kind of like a performative accountability in some ways, which I think is interesting, considering that they like, made the warnings more subtle. Now, I think that's interesting to think about. And then furthermore, I think it's interesting to think that Disney in general is kind of like a form of cultural and economic capital. At least where I was growing up, it was like the rich or the cool kids that got to go to Disney parks or like had access to cable or like the merchandise, the backpacks, clothing. And it's just like a niche thing. That's some kids had access to growing up and some kids didn't. So I think it's interesting to think

Speaker 5 • 16:41
about that and to add on. This paper also shows how media has played a big role in constructing race more seriously by repeatedly portraying certain groups in exaggerated or negative ways that which is start to feel normal and shape how people think about different cultures. Consistency content mainly targets like the younger. So when you're exposed to things at a younger age, you tend to believe

Speaker 6 • 17:10
it more

Speaker 5 • 17:14
and yeah, great.

Speaker 1 • 17:15
Thank you very much. It's a really good example and, okay, I'm going to send it to you because I don't want you to stand up. But something. I do want to say something more about it. So I think that. So first of all, it's really amazing because I think that, like, if you go back and look at a lot of the movies that at least I grew up, maybe you were also on your stuff. But the thing that I grew up on was very. There was like, there was a time which was called the Renaissance of Disney in the nineties, in which it was like. So a lot of the, like the, the movies were suddenly. So it's like you look at Snow White or like Cinderella, it's like kind of like in nowhere. It's not. It like, kind of looks like Europe, but it's not really Europe. They don't have, like, a specific place. But then suddenly there was this trend in the Renaissance of Disney which was like, triggered, like, specifically, like, focusing on a specific place that is not somewhere far, that we don't know where it is.

Speaker 1 • 18:10
But actually it's in a place like Poca Hondas. It's like in a place. Mulan is in a place. And then I think it's interesting because they're actually addressing specific cultures and specific history. And sometimes they do it more respectfully and sometimes they do it followly. So if you look at Pocahontas, for example, the end is not that, like, all the natives are being conquered by the English and like, what actually happened? It's just like, oh, the English then came back home in their sea. Bye, bye, but I leave you alone. Right? So that's the depiction that people are growing up with and they don't even know. Maybe, like, maybe here in the US you talk about it more, but definitely as a child in Israel, you don't hear a lot about Native Americans or anything that is outside of your own small region that you're focused in. So I think it's really, as you said, it's really depicting and creating narratives for children who are growing up on this idea.

Speaker 1 • 19:04
And I want to ask you all at class, does it remind you when we're talking about the way that this depiction of different cultures are creating narratives for us in the West? Does it remind you one of the, like, scholars or texts that we talked about? Yes, Orientalism. Orientalism, right. So it's very much Orientalism of Edward Said. So he's doing the same thing. If Edward Said was writing his Orientalism today, he would probably do it with newer media. So he was writing about poems about Paintings. But obviously newer media is doing a lot of this reproduction of orientation in different ways. So thank you very much for that example. I think that's really, really granted. And I want to ask us also to start our discussion, or I'm not. It's to start and to end. Because I want this to be the main question for us, for the discussion is what do we mean when we say, and we talked about it in lecture, the idea that race is so socially constructed but at the same time very real.

Speaker 1 • 20:08
When we say that an anthropologist or a social scientist, what do we actually mean? You can see the two different elements in this question. So one is why is it socially constructed? Or why is it constructed if you don't want it socially thought? And why is it still very real and not imaginary? Think about it for a second. What did we say about race that explain this paradox?

Speaker 5 • 20:38
Well, race is a construct because it doesn't have any basis in something that you can physically like see or hold on to in the way that we

Speaker 6 • 20:52
look at it.

Speaker 5 • 20:52
There's no biological basis for it. And it's something that in the way that it exists is purely an idea. But the thing that I think a lot of people forget is that, and I like, just because something is not like physical and it is an idea, doesn't mean that it has real, it doesn't have real world consequences. So while race isn't biologically like true or proven or it doesn't have any basis in biology or like things that are like in organic, the idea that it was true has made it so that it is embedded in our social ideas.

Speaker 1 • 21:39
Right. So yeah, and oh yeah, like in

Speaker 3 • 21:45
Asian Thailand, Chinese people, they can say clear that if like people from Bavarian areas, if they dress like Han Chinese, they say the same language as Han Chinese and they learn the Confucianism they will consider as the same as Han Chinese. And if they still keep their own veil life, they were considered as barbarians.

Speaker 1 • 22:08
Yeah, great. Anybody want to add something before I try to connect?

Speaker 6 • 22:15
I think it's interesting to see because I'm international, like being in Turkey and then coming to America, the racial groups that are targeted in different geographical areas are different. I didn't grow up with what was considered as being racist in America. The groups that were targeted in Turkey were different. So it's important. That's why I also agree that it's so social construct and it really depends on who you're surrounded with and what notion around certain groups of people is prevalent considering where you're at geographically. So it Was just an interesting thing that I realized, especially after coming to America.

Speaker 1 • 22:56
Just wanted to know that. Yeah, I think from somebody, if you're not growing in the US I feel like you can like the suddenly getting into this. This course of race. You can see the difference. Anybody want to add something before I. Yes.

Speaker 2 • 23:10
I feel like it's interesting because you can't just, like, if it was just a social contract, you. You could just forget about it and then like, everything would go back to normal. But, like, the damage is already done. So you have to acknowledge it as like a real thing, even though it's.

Speaker 1 • 23:27
Yeah, that's really interesting. I think that the idea of like this one is. Is already done is something that we can think about in different things. Is it done or is it reproduced all the time? So that's something that. I think that when we're talking about social phenomena and we're going to talk about it in different. We can talk about different social elements in our lives and we see that we're reproducing it again and again. Sometimes we're reproducing it through discourse, sometimes we're reproducing it through media, as we saw. Like, if we're thinking about. Eduard Said, it's actually sometimes, like, if you think about it, it's actually about reproduction of something because these images are reproducing themselves in newer versions. And then this is like the same phenomena is existing, even if we think that it's not true anymore.

Speaker 1 • 24:11
And we want to see. Remember this idea of reproduction also when we want to talk about. About habituals, about cultural hegemony. Yes. I was going to say similar to

Speaker 3 • 24:22
what you were saying.

Speaker 1 • 24:22
Even like, if we talk about race as if it's a construct, we're still acknowledging it and still giving it like the power. As if it is. Well, we're making it more real in a sense. Right. Yes.

Speaker 5 • 24:33
I also think that the something that I, like, kind of was picking up on when, like, something I. When you were saying it was like, is the damage done or are we just reprising it? I would say that it doesn't have to be like two different things. I think it can be both because there isn't a way to stop reproducing it. And so the damage is done in that sense. But it is like the damage is that it is reproducing it. And so if you look at things like, like our prison system in America, which is foundationally based on slavery, which is foundationally based on race, there's not a Way to like that. That is a real thing that has real world consequences. And so there's not a way to separate those without completely deconstructing society. So it is kind of like the damage is done, unless you want to destroy everything.

Speaker 1 • 25:26
So I do think that it's a big. I don't think we can get a very easy answer. But it is a very huge question that also social scientists at least are very busy with, like sociologists, psychologists and anthropologist. The question of like social reproduction, how things are staying the same even when sometimes we all agree or a lot of us agree that something is shitty and we're still doing it again and again. And I do also want to remind you that like we talked on gender, it's a very similar idea. So we know that gender is constructed, but we keep reproducing gender and how we reproduce it. We are reproducing it because we just take it for granted. And we are socializing our children into a certain belief or certain practices. And it's a big question, like, I'm not sure if we can answer the idea of like, can it be stopped if we decide that it stopped, that it's stopping from now on or not.

Speaker 1 • 26:22
Because it depends also on the scale and the levels. There are some social phenomena that are changing through time based on the same decisions that obviously if I'm deciding that from now on I'm ignoring race or I'm ignoring gender, it's not gonna stop, right? But if a mass movement is creating changes through socialization, for example, like if we're starting socializing our children differently. So it's not something, I remind you the word deterministics that we use on gender. It's not something that predetermined that. It's like the, the damage is damaged. From now on, we cannot change, can be changed if society will change. But then it's like a big question. How does it happen? Does it happen through revolution? Does it happen to each individual deciding tomorrow morning to make a change? And if so, what can I do? Because if I'm as an individual deciding that I want to change gender roles or race, obviously I have very limited power, right?

Speaker 1 • 27:20
So how. And I think that a lot of different scholars and theories try to create different explanations of how change, social change can be done or can't be done, sometimes can't be done. And also something that I want to remind you and that we talked about in gender, and I think that you already gave in some of the examples, especially when you're talking about when you talked about Turkey, Europe, and when you talked about China. So I remind you that when we talked about gender, we said that one of our best tools as anthropologists to see social construction and to understand that it's actually constructed and can be different if we decide that it will be different is to look at different places, right? To look right and left in other cultures and see that sometimes things are being done differently. And also to look at the past. Right. Remember that we did this distinction.

Speaker 1 • 28:08
So we can look geographically and we can look temporally. If you look at the same society for a long time, you can see differences. And if we see that there is a difference in gender, it means the gender is constructed and it doesn't have to be like that. So we can do the same exercise with race, for example. So if we look geographically, if we look at different places, and we saw it also in the article that you are. I don't want to tell if it's an article or a chapter of a book, never mind. But in the text that you are reading and from Garcia about race, so he was talking about comparing geographically. So he looked at Brazil and the US for example, China. And we see that different places have different racial places categories, which means that these race categories are actually very socially dependent. And I think it's something that you also saw in the example that you get in China.

Speaker 1 • 28:56
In Turkey, the category might be different. And not even. Sometimes it's not even clear that we have the same categories at all as in Turkey. Also in Israel, the language of race is not really existing. It's mainly other ways of categorizing. So it can be ethnicity. Sometimes it's like different element, country of origin, but we're not thinking through race. But even if you look at Brazil, for example, the rates are just different. And if you look at formal census, the categories will be very different than what you see here in the US and another example that we also had in the text, also we saw it in gender, not only looking at other cultures, but even if we look at our own cultures and we look in the Sarpass, we see that the categories are changing. So we see, for example, the example of race in the US how it was different one hundred years ago or fifty years ago, maybe fifty years or not, but like one hundred years ago, we can see that some groups are getting in and out of categories that are considered race.

Speaker 1 • 29:54
So Italians and Jews are the examples that a lot of people talk about in the US as categories that became white, like people categories who are used to be a different Race and suddenly are not being considered a race. So remember that every time that you're trying to think about social phenomena as something that's unconstructed, always think about this idea of like time and space. Any other thoughts or questions? Okay, so I want us to talk also about class and how much time do we have? Okay, fifteen minutes. So class, because you already started talking about marks, I want us to think about class. Next week we want to talk more thoroughly about Marx. Today we're going to talk more about. But I do want to like just nod to the idea that when we're talking about class, obviously we all. The first like things that we think about are money. Like how much money do we have?

Speaker 1 • 30:51
But just like there's a new tab for a second. God bless you. What do Marx say about class? Just in a sentence, right? So class. So class, according to Marx is property, but it's actually in the element of production. Right? The people who add the elements of production that they can create the elements of production. And the people who are the working class who don't have their own tools to produce. So we're going to talk about it next week. But it was just a way of like reminding you for a second that the idea of class, like was something that different colors defined differently. So Max was talking about production. In Bordier we're gonna see that we are talking about just different forms of like capital or different forms. What do we say when. What do we mean when we say capital? Like how would you define the rates of production? Right, A bit. No, that's Marx.

Speaker 1 • 31:47
That's Marx's definition of kids capital. But in general, when we think capital, what do we mean?

Speaker 3 • 31:52
Assize assets.

Speaker 1 • 31:55
So it could be assets. It could be. So it's something that has value in a certain context, that can be exchanged, that can be commodified, that has any sort of value in a society. And it changes from time to time in different societies, right? So maybe in one society the values can be if you have land or you don't have land. Some like obviously in our society, society it's money either if it's like actual money or other things that we can exchange for money. But we are thinking about different forms of capital. We see that actually capital is not always the actual money that we have in the bank. This is only the economic capital, which would be money, but would be assets. Could be maybe other things that you, you have any idea besides money and assets, what else we have in economic capital?

Speaker 4 • 32:51
Yes, infrastructure, like buildings, equipment.

Speaker 1 • 32:55
Right. So equipment. So it could be like objects, right? So it used to be diamonds, like if you had like, or pearls or. I don't know, I think it used to be not only like money, but like actual objects. But we still have objects. And also if somebody's rich and they have like a lot of paintings, was it in this section that somebody said that they had a friend with a lot of paintings in their house? No, it was in the other section. Never mind. So it used to be like painting. It's still actually not used to. So economic capital. But anyway, it's something that is very easy to see the value, like the money value of that object or actual money. When we're saying social capital, do you remember what this means? Social capital? Yes.

Speaker 3 • 33:36
Like direct people were connected and they could maybe have the potential benefits.

Speaker 1 • 33:44
Right? So the capital that is social capital is the value that you can create through social relationships. So obviously connections. And what we say when we imagine like there is a word for it like the mingling or like networking. Right. This is a word that we hear a lot today, especially with the LinkedIn and everything everybody's saying telling us connections are important, but not only they are important because we need support and we need friendships and we need love also. It's important because it's worth something. Right? It worth a job, it worth an apartment that we'll find. It's worth money. So any kind of capital. And I think that Bourgier was very useful in that, that he always think about the way that different values can be translated to other values. So money can be translated to get networks for social network. Network and social networks can be translated to manage.

Speaker 1 • 34:31
Okay. So always think about different ways that values are translated from one version to another. Yes. You wanted to say something?

Speaker 7 • 34:38
Yeah.

Speaker 5 • 34:38
Question for like ability, is that physical ability? Like I'm trying to think of like

Speaker 1 • 34:49
skill or like ability, disability.

Speaker 5 • 34:51
Like, like skill, like a skill level. Would that be economic or social capital? Because like it is kind of a piece of social capital that if you are very skilled at something, you don't really have to.

Speaker 1 • 35:04
Okay, so skill. I would actually put most of the skills that I think about would actually get in the third category, which is the cultural capital. So I gave you a definition of what do we mean when we say cultural capital. So the cultural capital are non economic resources such as knowledge, skills, tastes, dispositions that are socially valued and associated with usually high culture. High culture can change from one culture to another. So maybe one culture will think that being very religious is something that is very High and important. And it makes you have a better cultural capital. If you're familiar with all the texts of the Bible, maybe in one culture, in another culture, it could be because you're famous from TikTok. It gives you something that makes you, you a better person or famous or whatever. And it can create some sort of advantage or value in the social world.

Speaker 1 • 35:54
So obviously there is the things that are like, easy to see when we're saying like cultural capital in the sense of like, if I have a very good understanding of art, so if I have a very. I have a lot of like academic knowledge. And so you can see that these things, things are being translated to honor, respect, fame sometimes, but sometimes again to money. Like if I want to get a job, the skills that I have, if I understand how to manage people, if I know to quote the right people, like to be in the nice places. So sometimes we're talking, when we're talking about cultural capital, it's just like knowing what to know. Okay, what do we mean when we say knowing what to know? Like if I'm going to an interview to know what to say and what not to say, what are the things that are gonna make me look like a very quality kind of quality. Not qualified. How's the word of it?

Speaker 1 • 36:53
I'm trying to translate it from Hebrew. It's like elite kind of a person. So it's also again, it changes from one context to another. Sometimes it's understanding in forest. If you're going to a very masculine company, high tech company, sometimes being a very like, understanding football is something that's going to help you and sometimes it's not. Sometimes you have to be understanding visual art. You want to add something?

Speaker 6 • 37:15
Yeah, I was more talking about like

Speaker 5 • 37:17
when I was saying skill. Like I, I'm thinking of like, I think that there are a lot of like examples where there's someone who is the like, like they're so qualified for what they do and they like, they know so much about the thing that they have to do to make money that they can be really bad at all the other things because like, they don't need to have the social, like the social capital to be like charismatic. Because they just argue.

Speaker 1 • 37:51
Yes, I would still put it in the. So it's not like the thing that can give them value are not the social connections. They're not the already existing like typical economical capital that they have, but the fact that they have some knowledge that is useful in the society and can be translated to this kind of thing. So all of Cultural capital, if you look at like economic capital can be. It's something that you can vote, you can't get voted. If you're born in a very rich family, you don't have to do anything to get the economic capital because you already have it in your. Like, maybe they're not going to give you. Your parents, like, when you're three years old, they're not going to give you like a check for a credit card, but you already have the economic capital. Social capital also. It's kind of something that you can get born to. Right. If you're born into a.

Speaker 1 • 38:41
If you're the prince or the princess of England, you're actually born into a family that already have a lot of connection. And unless you're like this break. Unless you break this connection, you're already born into a social capital. Cultural capital is something that has to be learned. You cannot be born with a cultural capital because it's skills or things that have to be displaced in your body. And I wanted. I don't have a lot of time. Okay. I do want to see this video because I think it's just good examples of how cultural capital is being or how many deaths do I have. Yeah. If I want to find something specific, usually it's very difficult. So when I look at two short please.

Speaker 8 • 39:27
And about money and stuff, and I know for. Maybe this hasn't been your experience, but for my experience and that of many other men and women in stand up comedy, they work for years and years and years literally just making pennies. And then all of a sudden you get as big and your paychecks increase enormously. And is that any kind of pressure, any kind of problem for you?

Speaker 1 • 39:47
I'm completely all right with that. It's just, it seems to have. I seem to have relaxed into it nicely.

Speaker 8 • 39:58
It's a bit of pressure.

Speaker 1 • 39:59
I noticed that it changes you in little ways. Like it's changed the way I laugh at parties. Oh, really? I used to go, I used to go, that's really funny. You know, Now I go, oh, Oh, beautiful. Have you guys heard this one?

Speaker 8 • 40:28
You laugh that way because you know you're wealthy.

Speaker 1 • 40:31
Is that very wealthy? That's. That's odd. That's how wealthy people are. I wouldn't have. Oh, my temple. And we're going to see another minute temple updating from Frank. Wow, you look like my mom.

Speaker 5 • 40:52
I'm wearing pantyhose.

Speaker 1 • 40:55
Great. Come on in. He's nice.

Speaker 6 • 41:00
Thank you.

Speaker 7 • 41:02
Oh.

Speaker 5 • 41:03
Oh, my God, you're rich.

Speaker 1 • 41:04
No, my hair is rich.

Speaker 6 • 41:06
So they got a nice Sunday.

Speaker 1 • 41:08
Hello. Mom, dad, this is Phoebe. Phoebe, these are my parents, Theodore and Bitsy.

Speaker 5 • 41:14
Theodore, Bitsy. What a delight.

Speaker 1 • 41:20
It's so nice to finally meet you.

Speaker 6 • 41:21
And you.

Speaker 1 • 41:23
Your home is lovely.

Speaker 3 • 41:26
Thank you.

Speaker 1 • 41:27
I'll give you a tour later. It's actually three floors. Holy crap.

Speaker 5 • 41:33
Why don't you come to the living room and meet our friends? Try and stop me.

Speaker 1 • 41:38
What are you doing?

Speaker 5 • 41:39
I'm trying to get your parents to like me.

Speaker 1 • 41:41
Yeah, I'm sure they will, but, you know, you don't have to do this. I want them to get to know Phoebe, not Phoebe.

Speaker 8 • 41:46
Stop it.

Speaker 1 • 41:47
Whatever. It's hard to stop.

Speaker 4 • 41:51
Okay.

Speaker 1 • 41:51
Why?

Speaker 5 • 41:52
Do you think

Speaker 1 • 41:56
somebody would need to speak today? Yes.

Speaker 6 • 42:02
I guess it's just, like, it shows that when people are.

Speaker 5 • 42:04
I mean, the first one was, like,

Speaker 6 • 42:05
I don't think actually, like, how he actually feels.

Speaker 1 • 42:07
I think that was. But I think in general, the posters show, like, how people feel. Like, when they're around different types of

Speaker 6 • 42:12
people, they have to act in a different way. So kind of going back to the example earlier, like, you were saying, if

Speaker 1 • 42:17
you're really guiding

Speaker 5 • 42:20
her to people, you

Speaker 1 • 42:21
feel like you have to act like. But do you have to. Like, is it a strategic decision that you make in the moment every time that you let people. You think about the way that you left, or does the left change? He said that, like, something in him is changing. Right. Like, the way that he left suddenly is different.

Speaker 6 • 42:38
Yeah. I think for him it was, like, not on purpose.

Speaker 5 • 42:41
But I think for Phoebe, it, like, is on purpose.

Speaker 1 • 42:43
Right. So remember the idea of purpose? Yeah. Remember you wanted to say something?

Speaker 6 • 42:47
Oh, yeah.

Speaker 5 • 42:48
Like, I don't know. It just changes depending on the situation.

Speaker 1 • 42:51
I don't know.

Speaker 5 • 42:51
I just feel like with the Jim Carrey video, it's like the lap just kind of becomes louder. So it's like, kind of he allows himself to take up more space. And I feel like it would also

Speaker 6 • 43:04
be because other people around him also kind of laugh that same way. But then in the other video, I

Speaker 5 • 43:09
feel like they act a little bit

Speaker 6 • 43:11
more composed

Speaker 5 • 43:15
right in front of the

Speaker 6 • 43:17
guy's two parents who are rich.

Speaker 1 • 43:20
Right. So in both of these examples, we also see the way that, like, being rich is not about, like, only the money that you have, but also some kind of behavior, some kind of physical, even, like, bodily elements that we want to talk about next time. Because I'm aware that we ran out of time before. Like, so we want to start next week with talking about that and how Borgia is actually helping Us to see the way in which class is always connected to what we can say at cultural capital. Things that are like taste, clothing, knowledge, skills. So sometimes it's how we eat with fork and knife and sometimes it's how we wear clothes and sometimes it's how we walk or dress or not dress up. So sometimes it's how we laugh, walk, cry or move. And maybe I'll give you another more examples and what we're going to start from that next week. But we're going to see the bodily elements.

Speaker 1 • 44:27
Okay, bye. So anybody, what's the. Let's do a quiz for revive. What's the word that Borgia will give for this phenomena in which this class is becoming part of our bodily export like expression. You remember the word. It's a quiz. Okay, bye. The word is habitus. But like we're gonna talk about it next week. You didn't sign up.

Speaker 2 • 45:16
Bye.

Speaker 1 • 45:16
Bye. I'm making myself like literally I'm making. I'm making myself. This is like a timeline and I never. I'm like move to the next topic in eight hundred fifty five and then like fourteen minutes after I like. Okay,

Speaker 6 • 45:37
see you.

Speaker 1 • 45:40
I'm sorry but is there a new date for the final day? Yeah, so it's eighth of May. I remember because I'm plan like. Yes. So eighth of May, the final is the final day of the year. Okay, thank you.

Speaker 6 • 45:57
I can schedule my.

Speaker 1 • 45:59
Yes, you can see in the view port how it's called student portal. You can see all the exams. So also in your other course, I think you already supposed to be there.

Speaker 7 • 46:07
Got you.

Speaker 1 • 46:07
Thank you so much, girl.

Speaker 6 • 46:09
See you.

Speaker 1 • 46:09
See you. What is it? See you. Bye bye. Can I take my pen? Oh, maybe you going to use. And l. If you see my emails.

Speaker 5 • 46:28
I sent you email.

Speaker 1 • 46:29
Yes, I saw yesterday. Do you want to talk about it?

Speaker 5 • 46:31
Yes.

Speaker 1 • 46:32
Okay. Okay, so we're going to talk about it in a minute. Like I want to give you private fix.

Speaker 5 • 46:37
Yeah, It's.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Anthropological Perspectives on Money, Crisis, and Gift Exchange
Apr 1, 2026, 11:01 AM • 43 mins

SUMMARY KEYWORDS
money, gift exchange, reciprocity, fetishization, commodity fetishism, economic crisis, Janet Roitman, Marcel Mauss, Bill Maurer, deadweight loss, Joe Waldfogel, re-gifting, social norms, cultural differences, emotional value, responsibility, crisis framing

SPEAKERS
Speaker 1, Speaker 2

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Speaker 1 • 00:00
Caveats with that first hour mention. Some of them mention what he said and also add a few that I think are interesting to think with you about. Sometimes things seem illogical even if they are don't seem logically equal, even if they are financially commensurable. For example, the price of a car could be comparable to the price of a semester at bu. Are these commensurable? Why or why not? Interesting arguments to make either way, right? Many of the arguments about a semester BU would be forward looking. It would not necessarily be in this particular moment. Also very interesting. I love this example. You can't use any kind of money anywhere. Has anyone ever tried to pay at a restaurant with a bunch of coins? Probably not, right? Has anyone ever worked at a restaurant where someone tried to pay for their meal with a bunch of coins? Do we leave tips?

Speaker 1 • 01:07
We're a tipping culture. The culture that we are in right now is a tipping culture. Do you leave tips in coins? Quarters, pennies, Depends. Actually, it'd be probably kind of offensive, right? So. So we have ideas about money. Certain kinds of money can be used in certain places. You can't use any kind of money anywhere. If anyone tried to pay for semester BU in coins, it probably wouldn't work, right? But the coins would still add up, right? Even if they still added up to the amount that was necessary. Also interesting to note that even in societies that use money, right, people still engage in a lot of free exchange. This is what Bill Moore is interested in, right? He talks about his own kind of living situation in which he has a sustained relationship of free exchange with the people that he shares his house with. They live upstairs, he and his partner live downstairs.

Speaker 1 • 02:03
And so we have babysitter exchanges, carpools, we have clothes like trading, right? Meetups where people trade, swap their clothes. And also very interesting caveat. In some societies, the most prized exchanges are those in which money does not intervene. And we heard about this from Bill Moore, right? He talked about, for example, elder care and how there are conversations about whether or not that is a kind of care that should be monetized and what happens when it is monetized or. Or whether there are some kinds of exchanges that are kind of ethically outside of the realm of money or are treated with greater kind of honor when they are outside of the sphere of money. Very interesting then to look at how money changes how people think about what they are doing or about what they are receiving. And we also hear from Bill Maher about how we talk about money today.

Speaker 1 • 03:16
We'll take just A moment to talk about this. I want to use a word that we just saw, fetishization, right? A term that means again, treating something as if it were like a God, treating something as if it does not come from anywhere, as if it operates purely on its own terms, as if it is an independent agent. And we hear this, we turn on the news, we hear this, right? We listen to economists, we hear this, we listen to analyses of the stock market, we hear this. Money, we are told, makes things happen. Money can grow, right? This is a treatment of money as if it operates independently. And so this is very interesting to anthropologists that often the sphere of the economy or money itself is treated as something that is somehow independent, that operates independently according to rules that have to be identified, but that can be in some ways disconnected from human action.

Speaker 1 • 04:24
It's a very interesting understanding of money that anthropologists would say have consequences on how we use money, how we intervene in money and how we understand when things go wrong with money, which we'll talk about in a second. I did want to remind you of our conversation on Monday, right? Commodity fetishism, the other term for this week that we have heard that uses the term fetishism, which is again basically Karl Marx's concern as a nineteenth century philosopher, as a kind of left Hegelian moral philosopher thinking about human freedom, whether or not history is getting better, better. And he says, well, the fact that we don't see the relations of reduction, the often unequal relations of reduction that is behind the goods that we consume, that's a moral problem. And he writes in other parts of his book, he'll say it even makes us unhappy.

Speaker 1 • 05:20
The inability to make something that we ourselves use makes us unhappy. Another kind of thread in Marx that I think has been taken up in the contemporary political moment. The kind of need to make things that one consumes personally. I also wanted to talk with you about specifically money in relation to economic crises. And I wanted to talk with you about Janet Roytman. So Janet Roitman is an anthropologist who wrote a book in twenty thirteen. We don't read it in this class because it's pretty hard to read, I think. But it's a very. It's a long book that makes one actually, I think, very compelling and easy to understand argument, which is that the term crisis, as she says in the quote at the top, is an observation that produces meaning. When crisis is posited, certain questions become possible while others are foreclosed. This means that when you are told that there is an economic crisis, it becomes possible to ask some questions but not to ask others.

Speaker 1 • 06:37
Other questions become kind of nonsensical. And she is particularly interested in the questions that she says were foreclosed by the immediate qualification of the state of the subprime mortgage market in two thousand seven to two thousand nine and the inaugural State of the Union in two thousand nine, Estates of crisis. And so basically she's interested specifically, right? She's writing. She published this in twenty thirteen. She's interested in thinking about what qualifying the two thousand eight stock market crash as a kind of crisis, what that did, what kinds of questions that made possible. And so we see here some reporting at the time. I know most of you alive, but probably not reading the newspaper at that time. But here we have some headlines, right? Bailout plan rejected. Markets plunged Forcing new scramble to solve crisis.

Speaker 1 • 07:39
Lehman's collapse set off the financial crisis fifteen years ago today. This is a more recent Wall Street Journal article. And I want to show you here the big shorts. How many people have seen the big shorts? It's a film that tries to take on this question of what happens and it identifies some heroes and not others. This movie tries to say that the term crisis is not the appropriate term. So we're going to take a moment to watch it and then we're going to think then about what argument this particular film makes and watch the trailer and how this lays bare something that Roytman tells us the term crisis prevents us from seeing. Michael, how are you?

Speaker 2 • 08:39
I found something really interesting. The whole housing market is propped up on these bad loans. They will fail.

Speaker 1 • 08:49
The housing market is rock solid.

Speaker 2 • 08:53
It's a time bomb.

Speaker 1 • 08:55
So Mike Burry, who gets his haircut super cuts and doesn't wear shoes, knows more than Alan Greenspan.

Speaker 2 • 09:00
Doctor Mike Burry. Yes, he does.

Speaker 1 • 09:05
You know what? I'm pissed off. American people, we're getting screwed by the big banks. I am getting madder and madder.

Speaker 2 • 09:12
It's unbelievable.

Speaker 1 • 09:13
Then this guy walks into my office

Speaker 2 • 09:15
and says there's some shady stuff going down. All the banks would have a big old party. A few outsiders saw what no one else could. A whole world economy like collapse.

Speaker 1 • 09:31
I'm sure the world's banks have more incentives. Agreed. You're wrong. No one's paying attention. The banks got greedy and we can profit off of their stupidity. You want to bet against the banks?

Speaker 2 • 09:45
I think we're either high or having a stroke. Kind of willing.

Speaker 1 • 09:52
Fraud has never ever worked. Eventually things go south. When the hell did we forget all that? How come you guys let this happen? It's Fueled by stupidity. That's not stupidity, that's fraud.

Speaker 2 • 10:11
Tell me the difference between stupid and illegal and I'll have my wife's brother arrested. Do you have any idea what you just did? You just bet against the American economy. If you're wrong, you can lose it all. The banks defrauded the American people. Now we can kick with the team. Okay, here we go.

Speaker 1 • 10:42
We target strippers.

Speaker 2 • 10:43
It's bad loans and all cash rich.

Speaker 1 • 10:46
I'm not going to be able to refinance on all my loans. What do you mean all your loans? I have five houses and a condo. Okay, so we see in this film a pretty not subtle explanation, right? We hear it over and over again of who is responsible for this film, for the financial crisis. What is the answer?

Speaker 2 • 11:16
Yeah,

Speaker 1 • 11:36
Absolutely. So we hear over and over again, the banks. Right, the banks, the banks, the banks. And specifically for those of you who have seen the film, you know this, right? It's about inappropriate risk taking that's not backed, as your colleague was just saying, by the analysis of borrower ability to repay, etcetera. Etc. And so we see here actually again, a very unsubtle answer to the question. And unsubtle answers often tell us something. For example, they tell us that potentially the conversation at the time was not willing to attribute blame. And this is what Janet Royman would argue. This is her argument about the word crisis. She says the word crisis actually makes it difficult to locate responsibility. It proposes from the outset the impossibility of an origin event or a responsible party dissolves responsibility by preventing, by presenting it as unlocatable instead.

Speaker 1 • 12:42
And this is very interesting, the emphasis in the word crisis is about urgency, the urgency of stopping what is happening. And so again, right, this is what she's interested in calling something a crisis has, she would say, consequences. And so it will be interesting for you to think with this. Once you leave class, you go out in the world even after the semester when you see the word cratesis. Think with Janet Roytman about how that makes it difficult to attribute responsibility and how that might also result in films like this that want to insist over and over again that actually responsibility is attributable. Okay? We also think with Bill Moore about what the exchange of money or goods does in a social context. And this is where Moore takes issue with what he says is what economists generally miss. And this is also where we're heading with Marcel Mose, our reading for today.

Speaker 1 • 13:57
And so, according to Bill Maher, what do economists generally get wrong when about exchange? He tells us in what I think is the most interesting moment of his interview, that economists are always imagining that the end of transactions is to have them settled. He says that we enter a relationship of debt and the understanding of many economists in order to have those debts ultimately settled. And Bill Moore says economists love that vision of the market because it is a frictionless market. It is one that is neat and tidy, in which you hand me something over at the store, I give you money and then it's over and we go our separate ways. And Bill Maher says economists also like this idea because they think of parties coming to the market anonymously, using money to mediate a relationship between two anonymous people that then. A relationship that then continues anonymously.

Speaker 1 • 15:12
And Bill Moore says, okay, but if we think of a world in which all relationships are settled, all, I'm sorry, all debts are settled, then what he says is that world, that's a world then of no more relationships, of no more mutuality, of no more obligation. Society, he says, is not a thing of settled debts, but of ongoing, continuous relationships of unsettled debts or the unsettling of debts, and on and on and on. There is no moment at which it ends. And this is actually the argument made in a slightly different way by Marcel Mauss in the Gift, a very famous piece that you read for today. I know it's a little bit challenging, and so we're going to make sense of it together. So Marcel Most died in the middle of the twentieth century. French anthropologist, is very famous for his work looking at potlatch practices, so kind of feasting practices among indigenous peoples in different parts of the world, specifically the Pacific Northwest, north, northwestern United States, and among the indigenous Maori in New Zealand, and Polynesian islanders as well.

Speaker 1 • 16:37
And Mo says something that we have seen early on in the semester among early anthropologists. He says, okay, I'm going to look at these particular groups, these indigenous groups, these quote, unquote, what was called at the beginning of the twentieth century traditional societies, something that later anthropologists, a term that later anthropologists abandoned. He says, I want to look at these societies that appear to be in some ways non Western, but they're going to tell us something very important about how human society itself works. A very typical analytical move. And Mose argues that reciprocal gift giving practices of goods, but also of other things like courtesies, dances, parties, they confer status, what he calls manna, or prestige, right? When you welcome someone into your home, you do a good job, or you give someone an amazing present, converse, prestige, but also reciprocal gift giving.

Speaker 1 • 17:41
Creates bonds among groups of people. And this is Moses very famous argument, this term that we have, how H A U. He writes, the obligation attached to a gift itself is not inert. Even when abandoned by the giver, it still forms a part of him through it, the gift. The giver has a hold over the recipient. The how, what most calls the spirit of the gift wants to return, he says, to the place of its birth to keep this thing. The how, the spirit of the gift is dangerous not only because it is illicit to do so, it violates norms, it's against the rules, but also because it comes morally, physically and spiritually from a person in this way, he writes, it retains a magical and religious hold. This is actually one of the more famous passages from any anthropological text that we will study this semester. And so again, this is drawing on Mars idea that gift giving creates relationships of mutuality, relationships of reciprocity creates unsettled debts that are consistently projected into the future, that are the relationships of a society, of the society in which we live, of any society which human beings live together.

Speaker 1 • 19:21
And Mose is saying the obligation attached to the gift is something that the recipient also has to manage and is aware of. There is a spirit, a moral, physical, spiritual attachment of the gift received to the person from which the gift came. We're going to think a little bit about this proposal together. Okay? So I'd like you to take a moment, say hi to the people around you, and I'd like you to think about your gift giving practices. Who do you give gifts to? Why do the people that you give gifts to give you gifts as well? When do you give gifts that are unreciprocated? We all give gifts sometimes that are unreciprocated. To whom are we giving these gifts? I'll give you an example. A friend just had a baby. I gave the baby a gift. The baby did not give me a gift back. I did not expect that. Do you throw away gifts other people have given you? If so, why? And which gifts and which gifts do you not throw away?

Speaker 1 • 20:34
And is it because you like the gift or is it personal? I'm sorry, do you keep the gift because you like it or for some other reason? Okay, so let's take a few minutes to talk to the people around us and then I'm interested in hearing from you.

Speaker 2 • 21:01
I mean, for example, while I'm giving birthdays and stuff, I don't expect the other party to, you know, give me a gift back on my birthday, to be honest, because, I mean, partially because, I mean, it's from Goodwill and like, partially because I don't have that much, you know, expectations from human.

Speaker 1 • 21:34
I think during Christmas, like, I get my younger brother or something, but I don't really.

Speaker 2 • 21:46
Yeah, makes sense. Comes with eight, I guess. I don't think I've thrown away other people's gifts.

Speaker 1 • 22:25
I don't think I have either. Unless it's like really, really old or something. And I got it a long time ago.

Speaker 2 • 22:34
Yeah, I mean, I've definitely, like, passed it on to another person. Like, for example, I got these, like, headphones that I really didn't need. So I just gave them to my sister. She, like, uses them with her, like, what piano. Org or something like that. So, like, if it. If I'm not gonna, like, use it too much and somebody else would, I would just like, re. Gift the gift. Probably.

Speaker 1 • 23:04
Yeah. If I don't like it and like, someone else would use it, then I just. I don't throw it out. I just.

Speaker 2 • 23:17
Yeah,

Speaker 1 • 24:08
Occasionally my brother. Okay. So I'm interested in hearing from you. Who do you give gifts to and why? To people you give gifts to Give gifts to you as.

Speaker 2 • 24:33
As well.

Speaker 1 • 24:33
Sure. Yeah.

Speaker 2 • 24:59
Before they taught me knowledge and skill.

Speaker 1 • 25:08
Super, super interesting. To your colleague saying, when they went back to China, they brought. For summer break, they brought gifts from the MFA to their teachers in China who had taught them. It's imagined as a kind of reciprocal for having taught them previously. Very interesting. Absolutely. This is a great example. This is a practice that we see across elementary schools as well. Yeah, absolutely. For someone's birthday. Really excellent example. You give someone a gift, you don't expect them to give you a gift back, at least not immediately. What if you give your friend a gift for their birthday? What should happen when your birthday comes around? They should give you a gift when your birthday comes around. Very interesting. Sometimes your birthday. What if your birthday is like, january first? What if their birthday january first and your birthday is like november twenty ninth?

Speaker 1 • 26:10
Hopefully they remember. You may remember. If they don't give you a gift. How would it make you feel? Maybe you're sad, maybe you're not. Maybe you're sad, maybe you're not. True. You might be like, how did you forget my birthday? You were important enough for me to give you a present. Yeah. At least in my family and people around me. Yes. You also supposed to give birthday presently, firstly. So it's kind of like reciprocated because you get. Super, super interesting. So you give someone a gift on their birthday, but they also, in the culture that you're referring to is this Russian culture. In Russian culture, invite the person rate in the area that you grew up, you would actually have people over for your birthday. So it'd be kind of an obligation to host people on your birthday or at a restaurant, but you would pay if you went to the restaurant.

Speaker 1 • 27:20
Super interesting. This reminds me of something that somewhat related, but in Tunisia, my field site, when something good happens to you, you take other people out to eat or for a drink. Whereas I think in American culture, if I'm remembering, at least in this kind of community where I grew up, other people would take you out if something good happened to you. Does that sound right? Yes. People are nodding yes. If you get a hole in one in golf, you have to buy drinks for the entire club. Interesting. If you get a hole in one at golf, you have to buy drinks for the entire clubhouse. Entire clubhouse. That's expensive. Okay. Does not happen very often. Interesting. What about other gift giving practices? Yeah, Super interesting. So small gifts, I was going to ask you the small gifts you're talking about, would that be like getting someone a coffee when you're going to see them?

Speaker 1 • 28:40
Super interesting. So small gifts, you're going to go see your friend, you grab them a coffee on the way, you give it to them. And how also the act of very interesting wrapping gifts, how that changes in some ways, maybe the meaning of the gift, the value of the gift, it makes it kind of more formal, it makes it more special. If anyone has ever bought an expensive gift at a store and they're like, you don't have anything to wrap it in, can sometimes feel like, okay, but now it's not going to look like a nice gift. Right. Often stores will have special packages to wrap particularly expensive, expensive gifts. Sometimes during particular holidays, for example, in the United States, bookstores will actually offer wrapping on the spot for free to encourage people to buy books and to make those books look like gifts. Other examples of gift giving practices?

Speaker 2 • 29:41
Yeah, housewarming gifts are one type of gift giving practice. In Turkey, however, like, we give gifts to anyone if we like go to their house for the first time, not for like opening their house, like for the first time.

Speaker 1 • 29:59
Interesting. So when you go to someone's house for the first time, even if they live there for thirty years, you still would bring them a gift?

Speaker 2 • 30:06
Yes, I believe so.

Speaker 1 • 30:09
Right. It's interesting too, because sometimes they're like, yes, I think that this is right. I need to confirm. Right. Because sometimes these norms vary. Sometimes they change. They change generationally, they change across space, sometimes even Our knowledge of them. Right. We have to try to intuit from what we have seen other people do. Right. There's not necessarily a guidebook. You can't go online and find like a list of all of the rules about gift giving in a particular place at a particular time. Many of these we have to kind of into it. Which also means that sometimes we violate that. So I'm going to have an interesting story about a violation of a gift giving practice that they discussed. Yeah. Re gifting. Super interesting. What is re gifting for people who don't know. So you receive a gift and then you gift that gift to someone else.

Speaker 1 • 31:06
What potential violations could happen or how is it a violation? Yeah, But if you're re gifting it, it feels like you didn't put effort into that item and you're just giving it away as if you don't. Super interesting. So you get a gift from someone like it. There's a piece of that person in the gift according to most. Right. That person expended probably mental energy, physical energy, picking out the gift, getting the gift, giving you the gift. And so it feels disrespectful in some way to then just give that gift to someone else as a kind of. It's a very easy. Right. Effort. Who would you regift to? Do you regift to people that you like? We'll say my brother has someone in our extended family he's not a huge fan of. He does sometimes re gift for the holidays for that person. Secretly. It is a little bit of an indication. Right. Of a certain amount of dislike and maybe a little bit of a tongue in cheek way.

Speaker 1 • 32:23
Yeah, super interesting. Re gifting. And did you have something to share? I was. You're going to say regifting as well. Do you have any interesting examples of when someone has regifted something to you or have you ever gifted something you've never regifted? I've never. So great. Interesting to think about the ways that actually Moses argument about how gifts are attached to people physically, spiritually, morally show up in our own gift giving practices. I also want to discuss our final question here. Do you throw away gifts? Yeah.

Speaker 2 • 33:01
We talked about how like it's sort of more acceptable to throw away gifts that are focused on like practicality that you can throw away like a freaking pair of socks or something, but it would seem like less acceptable.

Speaker 1 • 33:20
Super interesting. So you wouldn't throw away. So there. So your colleague is saying there, there are different rules around different gifts. So like a card that you got you Would keep. Interesting. Right. So we're in a culture that has a very robust card exchange culture that does not exist everywhere. And so we often in the same boats keep those cards. Right. They often have the same signature of someone. Right. The person who gave us the card, that person. Sometimes they'll left, sometimes not. Right. I have cards from my grandmother that I still have that have her signature on it. So we may keep those cards, but we may throw away other things that your colleague said had a more utilitarian use. Socks that get holes in them. It could be acceptable to throw those away. Interesting. Other examples of gifts that you have thrown away. Yeah, Super interesting.

Speaker 1 • 34:25
So a gift from a stranger that you don't trust. How would the stranger have given you the gift? Absolutely. Some kind of public event where there's actually baby shower. Super interesting. Someone that you don't like or trust gave you something. Maybe you're not going to keep that. Maybe you'll regift it. Maybe you'll throw it away. Maybe you'll donate it. Right. Very interesting. Other examples, other gifts that have been thrown away.

Speaker 2 • 35:00
Yeah,

Speaker 1 • 35:25
That's really interesting to can regift. But you were gifted to your younger sister, so it stayed within the family. It's a gift that came from the outside. Stay within the family. Some ways a method of honoring the gift different than. Right. Regifting it and giving it to someone without necessarily intention. Yeah, that's very interesting. Does anyone have any heirlooms that they have perhaps at their house and don't really use? Maybe having a box somewhere. Anybody have any jewelry that they've inherited that they don't wear? Yeah. Yeah. Any examples? Super interesting. Really good example. So your colleague is saying their grandmother passed away, left some jewelry. All costume jewelry your colleague described as kind of gaudy jewelry. Probably no one's going to wear it, but no one wants to throw it away. So it's stays in a box.

Speaker 1 • 36:44
Right. Excellent example. Excellent indication of this thing that most tells us. Right. The gifts again have a power. They are attached to the person from which they come. I would even say they have a little piece of the person from which the gift came inside of them. So I'm going to finish by talking with you about Bill Maher's discussion of Joe Walds Fogle, who is not very far from us, who wrote a piece called the Dead Weight Loss of Christmas. And Bill Maher was very irritated with Joe Wadvogel. He says an important feature. Sorry, this is Wadvogel. An important feature of gift giving is that consumption Choices are made by someone other than the final consumer seems illogical. A potential important microeconomic aspect of gift giving is that gifts may be mismatched with the recipient's preferences. People get gifts that they don't want.

Speaker 1 • 37:51
In the standard microeconomic framework of consumer choice, the best a gift giver can do with, say, dollar ten is to duplicate the choice that the recipient would have made. What is possible for a giver to choose a gift which the recipient ultimately values even above its price? It is more likely that the gift will leave the recipient worse off than if she had made her own consumption choice with an equal amount of cash. In short, gift giving is a potential source of deadweight loss. So Walt Fogel says estimates in this paper indicate that between a tenth and a third of the value of holiday gifts if destroyed by, or is destroyed by holiday gift giving. Holiday gift expenditures in nineteen ninety two totaled thirty eight billion dollars. If between a tenth and a third of the spending was wasted, then the deadweight loss of nineteen ninety two holiday gift giving was between four and thirteen billion.

Speaker 1 • 38:48
And this is in the nineteen nineties. So basically, Walfogo is saying, and we hear about the symbol war. Watvoga is saying we should just give people cash. Why do we not just give people cash? Sometimes we do, but why don't we just always give people cash?

Speaker 2 • 39:11
Yeah, it's seen as insensitive to the other person because when we give other people cash as gifts, it means that we don't know them enough, basically, to get them a gift that is thoughtful enough.

Speaker 1 • 39:26
Super interesting. So your colleague said if we give them money, if you give them cash, it indicates that we don't really know them very well. That's very interesting. Yeah. Also, not everyone is comfortable with like, receiving cash. It can also feel different to receive cash. This reminds us of what we talked about earlier in class, which is that sometimes some acts of service, some forms of labor, such as caring for the elderly, some people say, right, money should not intervene in that particular relationship. For example, a filial relationship with a child, caring for their parents, they may not be paid for that labor. That relationship is imagined as more is too important to be monetized sometimes. Very interesting. Right. You have a hand up over here. Why we don't give cash. So Fillmore. Oh, sorry. Yeah. In the back. Yeah. But there are certain occasions.

Speaker 1 • 40:48
Super interesting point. So your colleague is also pointing out that we do actually have some events at which we give money. So you mentioned bar mitzvahs, weddings, Eid just happened. Children often get money at eid. They also get new clothes. Very interesting. So we do have some holidays in which money is the norm. We have other holidays in which money is not the norm. And several of your colleagues have pointed out what Bill Moore says as well, which is that we don't just give money because there's another type of effort or labor behind the gift giving. Right. It is about again, the idea that the gift comes from me. It is specific to me. It shows something that I know about you. And so it includes within it a message about the person, the recipient, how that person is, and about the relationship between the two. And so some of the ideas that we talked about then.

Speaker 1 • 41:47
Gift giving is governed by often unspoken norms. Like your colleague who's telling us about Turkish gift giving practices, I think was thinking, or I'm sorry, housewarming guests was thinking. Okay. Am I right? I have to think about that, right? There's not a, there's not a manual, it's not a guidebook. We often have to figure these out by imprints. Recipients also experience gifts as if they carry traces of the givers in them. And the non reciprocation of gifts can have consequences. And we see that here. Final update. Returning the birthday gift I got for my boyfriend after he insulted me. When you get them a gift for your birthday, but they don't get you for your birthday. So my best friend didn't give me a thoughtful or expensive birthday gift. All examples of what Moses telling us at work. And so we have our takeaways for today. Gift exchanges solidify social relationships.

Speaker 1 • 42:46
They leave open depths that perpetuate into the future. They give a relationships. They give relationships past and future. And violating the norms around gift giving does send a message. Okay, on Friday we're going to talk about bullshit jobs. David Graber, very famous piece, very fun to read. And then we have a short excerpt from a piece not by an anthropologist, but someone who is doing ethnographic fieldwork. I'm interested to hear your thoughts on it. I'll see you then.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Class, Labor, and Commodity Fetishism: From Bourdieu to Marx and Modern AI
Mar 30, 2026, 11:01 AM • 41 mins

SUMMARY KEYWORDS
Pierre Bourdieu, Raymond Carroll, social class, sports, commodity fetishism, Karl Marx, alienation, use value, exchange value, labor theory of value, AI systems, invisible labor, ethical consumption, traceable clothing, Anatomy of an AI System

SPEAKERS
Speaker 1, Speaker 2, Speaker 3, Speaker 4, Speaker 5, Speaker 6

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Speaker 1 • 00:00
And so it is the kind of question that could be on the final. Does anyone remember, conversely, how silence is used, per Raymond Carroll, in French versus American Content? Excellent. So Raymond Carroll and people, students in the past have said, well, I don't know, completely legitimate limitations to raise, I think, to this argument. But her argument, which I think does hold some water, is that French people use silence to create distance. They don't stand in line with one another at the grocery store and chit chat in the way that Americans do. Americans, on the other hand, use silence actually as a way of indexing sometimes how close people are. If you think about this, there are probably a limited number of people that perhaps you or people that you know can actually be totally silent with. And so this is Carol's argument, right, about what speech does and also what silence does.

Speaker 1 • 01:18
And, and so this is the type of thing that you would want to have in mind for the final, something that we talked about in lecture. And so you'd want to look at specifically what we talked about in lecture and then go back to the article and look at how the author makes those particular arguments. I often highlight excerpts for you that I think are especially useful, but also themes and ideas. Does that make sense? Okay, great. So we're just going to spend a moment with revisiting Pierre Bourdieu. We ended on this point. I did want to highlight the take homes from our conversation with Bourgiou specifically about golf. And we saw this article on Friday from the Golf Science Journal. One of the main findings within the sociology of sport literature is that social class is the main predictor of sport and leisure behavior in both childhood and adulthood.

Speaker 1 • 02:19
However, scholars are careful to realize that socioeconomic factors are not the only relevant factors in obtaining a taste for golf. As Bourdieu has argued. The person that we read there are hidden entry requirements, including family socialization and early training. Golf has been used as a vehicle by the upper classes to detach themselves from from other classes and gain power and influence. So this is a place in the real world where Pierre Bourdieu, right, written about forty years ago, even longer actually, taste was written about fifty years ago where Bourgieu is showing up. And we didn't read this together, so I wanted to take a moment to read it with you. This is the place where I think Born Giro lays out very clearly what he sees as some of the primary differences between what he is describing as working class sports participation in nineteen sixties France and middle class or upper class, specifically upper class sports participation.

Speaker 1 • 03:34
All the Features which appeal to the dominant taste. So this would be the upper class taste. The dominant taste are combined in sports such as golf, tennis, sailing, riding or show jumping, skiing, fencing, practiced in exclusive places, private clubs at the time that one chooses, alone or with chosen partners. Features which contrast with the collective discipline, obligatory rhythms and imposed efforts of team sports connected with the working classes, demanding a relatively low physical exertion that is in any case freely determined, but a relatively high investment of time and learning. They, meaning upper class tastes and sports practices, give rise to highly ritualized competitions, governed beyond the rules by the unwritten laws of fair play, of a kind of gallantry. The sporting exchange takes on the air among the dominant class of a highly controlled social exchange, excluding all physical and verbal violence, all anomic use of the body, meaning wild gestures, and all forms of direct contact between the opponents.

Speaker 1 • 04:46
If you think about it, this is true, right? In golf, very minimal contact among the participants and each participant playing on their own. Thus, it can be seen that economic barriers, however great they may be, in the case of golf, skiing, sailing, or even riding and tennis, are not sufficient to explain the class distribution of these activities. There are more hidden entry requirements, such as family tradition, early training, or the obligatory manner of dress and behavior, and socializing techniques. So here we have a schema laid out between what Borgia call working class sports practices or sports practices attached to the working classes and sports practices attached to the upper classes or the dominant classes. I'd actually like us to take a moment before we shift to the second half of class, like you, just say hi to the people around you.

Speaker 1 • 05:47
What do you think of this? Does this make sense to you? And I'd like us to map out briefly what particular characteristics are associated with working class versus dominant class or upper class sporting practices. Take about thirty seconds, thirty seconds or a minute to have the people around us, and then I'm going to ask for your feedback.

Speaker 2 • 06:46
Wait, what was the question again? I have no clue.

Speaker 3 • 07:35
Hidden entry requirements.

Speaker 1 • 08:03
Okay, so I'm interested in hearing from you what characterizes working class sports per Pierre Bourdieu? What are some examples of working class sports? Or what does Pierre Rodrigo say we see in practices sports. Sporting practices associated with working classes? Yes, Absolutely. Physical contact. Absolutely. Excellent. Up close physical contact. Sometimes violence. Right? Kind of part of that. Physical contact. Excellent. Do people play by themselves? Do they play on teams? How does that schema work? Okay, let's take a vote. Do working. Who thinks that working class sports have an emphasis on the individual? Individual players, raise your hand. Who thinks it has an emphasis on team players. Okay, that is correct. So team. Right. Team players, Upper class individuals, and lack of physical contact. Okay. Also, we have here an anomic use of the body is excluded.

Speaker 1 • 10:07
It's not a lot of yelling, wild gestures. The body, Borgia would say, is more restricted in its movements. Okay, What about this part we see here that Borgia says family tradition is important. Socialization, having the right dress, knowing how to behave. Does that make sense to you? That there is a kind of vestmentary code, a way of carrying your body. That limits access to some of these upper class sports? Some of these sports tied to the dominant class. Yeah. So you're nodding. Can anyone give an example?

Speaker 4 • 11:10
Yeah.

Speaker 2 • 11:12
That you have to be able to

Speaker 4 • 11:13
afford, like the face masks, the clothes and the spear, whatever.

Speaker 1 • 11:20
Absolutely. Expensive equipment. And it's not equipment that's shared. Right. Because it's an individual sport, you have to buy your own clubs. You probably don't share them. They're based on how tall you are. Right. Other examples. Yeah.

Speaker 3 • 11:42
Well, also with like the expensive equipment, like an expensive location, whether that's like stuff like a country club or like a tennis sailing club.

Speaker 1 • 11:52
Absolutely. Expensive venue. And Bourdieu will say, often the places where working class sports are played are public places. And there is a high ability to improvise the kind of equipment and space that is needed. The initial investment is low. Okay, so this again is an example of what Pierre Borgio wants us to pay attention to, which is how the body moves in space and how the body and what it is able to do in space, what it is invited to do in space, what it imagines itself is capable of doing, imagines it is normal for it to do, how all of that is tied to class in ways that are sometimes very clear to us. If you've ever gone to, for example, a golf club, a country club, for example, and realize you're not wearing the correct clothing, you've been very aware of this. If you've ever realized or heard about someone realizing, again, on the theme of golf, that some clients in a business that you may be working for like to play golf and like to make business relationships over a game of golf, you would be aware of this.

Speaker 1 • 13:29
But if this is normal to you, it may be invisible to you as well. And so this is our final example from class on Friday. We talked about how people may learn particular sports, learn to use their bodies in particular ways, to do particular things with their bodies in order to increase their social mobility. Right. Cover their bodies in particular ways, wear particular clothing Learn to eat particular foods, my example with oysters, or learn to play particular sports. So our kind of summary slide from class on Friday was about again, taste is tied to class position. How one can also try to change one's preferences in a conscious way to change one's class position. And how then class, like race, is both assigned. It comes from the outside, it comes from this thing, this amorphous thing that we may call society. And it is also something that is chosen.

Speaker 1 • 14:27
And sometimes that we try to play with or transform. It can be a source of both oppression and a source of pride. We saw this last Wednesday with Susan Falls article on the demolition derby where we looked at cars that had been named, have been given the names associated with, with slurs against poor whites, for example, white trash. Okay, so we're going to shift the rest of class to talking about this very famous tract from the eighteen sixties from the book Capital, written by Karl Marx. Someone who died in the eighteen eighties and had a very long life afterwards has been taken up in different ways by different people. I'd like us to think about him today, not in relationship to how he is used or eschewed or embraced in the contemporary political moment, but actually thinking about him as a nineteenth century philosopher, a left Hegelian, someone who was concerned about these very big questions of human freedom and about the progress of history, if history was going in the right direction, if human beings are going to end up free or if they were going to end up living a oppressed and under tyranny.

Speaker 1 • 15:46
Karl Marx, German, very unconventional individual, interested in theology. He ended up doing a PhD in philosophy. His work is characterized, like many of the people that he was in conversation with, by very strong moral concerns. He was worried, is the world going in the right direction? And he was especially concerned about the new economic order that had arisen before the time of his writing. Right. So capitalism. He was also, it's worth noting, someone who had married above his class. And when he wrote his PhD thesis, he dedicated it to his wife's father. And so he was someone who was probably in his own life, very aware of class, of social class, of the consequences of the economic system in his own kind of personal relationships. And we've talked about, we talked about last week, specifically what Marx tells us about how he sees the class hierarchy and people's position and including his own position in it, and how he saw society, the time of his writing, as divided into two classes.

Speaker 1 • 17:04
So again, we've seen this before, but I'll just reiterate the class of the capitalist or the bourgeoisie. Those are the people who own the means of production, who do not need to sell their labor, sell their bodies, but own the means of reduction. Where other people labor, they purchase the labor of others. And then the other class that we have, the workers, also sometimes called the proletariat, which is the class that has to sell their labor, sell their time and sell their bodies, do not own the means of production. And so Marx, as we said last week, one of his moral concerns, again, he's invested in all these conversations about human freedom, about whether or not history is kind of moving, evolving towards something better or not. His big moral concern was the incompatibility of these two classes interests. One wants to extract surplus labor without paying more for it because they need to make a profit.

Speaker 1 • 18:04
And one group, right, would like to be paid for their labor and also would like to have an acceptable quality of life. And so Marx saw these two groups as in an irresolvable clash. And for this reason, this is what Marx is often known for today, was a popular idea at the time. Capitalism, Marx said, was ultimately unsustainable. And I did just want to mention Rosa Luxembourg, someone who I read in a course once on economic theory, and it's often discussed in term in relation to colonialism. She was actually executed in nineteen nineteen, but she was very interested in the relationship between capitalism and colonialism, something that we've talked about. She said capitalism, which relies on the extraction of raw materials, right? The raw materials that are used to make commodities, to make products. Capitalism relies on the extraction of raw materials from often unindustrialized places in the world, which are often in the colonies.

Speaker 1 • 19:18
And so she says, capitalism needs colonialism to exist. It needs the colonies to exist, and it needs this constant extraction order to self perpetuate. However, she says, again, this is the question they were all worried about. Can this go on? Where will this end up? She would say the extraction of raw material is not possible endlessly. And so capitalism is not eternal. There is a moment at which the system will collapse. In terms of what Marx is concerned about in the excerpt that we read for today, again in volume one of Capital, sometimes people call it Das capital. He's interested in this term commodity, which we're going to talk about, often described as something that can be bought and sold. And he's also interested in this term fetishism. We've seen this before, we're going to see it again. Fetishism is treating an object as if it exists on its own, like it is a God.

Speaker 1 • 20:23
This is often how, if you look at Wikipedia, I think this is how it defines fetishism. Treating something as if it were a God matters because we don't have to account where God came from. God just exists. And so fetishism means treating something as if it doesn't have an origin, it is just there. And so we have this very long quote from the opening of Capital, or from the. The opening of the section on commodity. Very famous excerpt. So I did want to highlight it for you. You will probably run into it again. What I think is important here is that Marx tells us it looks at the beginning like a commodity. Something that is bought and sold. The commodity is easy to understand. It actually seems very trivial. But in fact, this is often quoted. It is in reality a very queer thing, abounding in metaphysical subtleties and theological niceties. And so Marx tells us this commodity.

Speaker 1 • 21:29
Everybody thinks it doesn't matter, but in fact it has enormous meaning. It is actually a mystery. It seems to not be mysterious, but it is actually a mystery. And so Marx gives us a number of terms that I wanted to define for you. If you see them again, which I imagine you probably will, I'd like you to have a grasp of them, not be intimidated by them. Marx is hard to read, but his ideas, once you figure them out, are actually not that hard to understand. And he becomes much easier to read the more that you read him. So a commodity, he says, is an object outside of us. A thing that justifies human wants of some sort or another. So again, something that is bought or sold. Right? Use value. He uses this term in the excerpt that you read. You might have found it confusing. A use value is basically something that is useful to us because we use it, because it does something for us.

Speaker 1 • 22:47
A house, a coat, a walking stick, also air. Use value. Things that have use value can also be things that are not sold. And Marx is very careful to tell us that. He tells us the use value is different from the exchange value. The exchange value is when commodities on a marketplace are exchanged against one another. They may acquire value and produce surplus value or profit in relation to one another and in relation to a third factor, money. And Marx is very well known for his labor theory of value, which we're also going to think a little bit about today. All commodities, he writes, are merely definite quantities of congealed labor times which are then valued on the market and sometimes which result in profit. Meaning that some labor somewhere has to sometimes end up devalued, unpaid, or underpaid. Here's an example of what he means by congealed labor times.

Speaker 1 • 23:56
In the production of the linen coat, he writes, human labor power in the shape of tailoring, gathering linen and transforming it into a coat must have actually been expended. Human labor is therefore accumulated in the linen coat. In this aspect, the coat is a depository of value. But though worn to a thread, it does not let this fact show through. And so what Marx is pointing to is that all of these objects that we use in our everyday life have in them congealed human labor, have hours of different kinds of human labor at different moments. The creation of the product, the accumulation of the resources that made it, the transportation of the object to where we are, for example. But this human labor, he says, is often invisible to us. And this is what he finds concerning a commodity, Marx writes, is that better but easier to see? A commodity, Marx writes, is therefore a mysterious thing simply because in it, the social character of men's labor appears to them as an objective character stamped upon the product of that labor.

Speaker 1 • 25:24
Because the relation of the producers to the sum total of their own labor is presented to them as a social relation, existing not between themselves, but between the products of their labor. Again, this exchange value, right? Goods acquire value on the market in relation to one another, not necessarily in relation to the labor itself. This is the reason why the products of labor become commodities, social things whose qualities are at the same time perceptible and imperceptible by the senses. With commodities. There's a definite social relation between men that assumes in their eyes, the fantastic form of a relation between things. It's a very famous excerpt. I think it's a little bit hard to understand. I'm going to show you how a youtuber who is very interested in fashion and took a stab at explaining this explains it. I think he does an excellent job.

Speaker 1 • 26:26
So we are going to watch him thinking again about what Marx is saying here, about how men's labor appears to them not as a relationship among people, but as a relationship, in fact, among things in which their labor is congealed.

Speaker 4 • 26:58
But what is there really to explain? Well, one important thing to note is that the changes that the material things around you that makes your life possible, your stove, your shoes, your bed, and everything else in your life for that matter, Practically all of this stuff was cultivated, produced, and manufactured somewhere else. And you have no idea where that is. Usually this stuff was brought into existence by someone else. And you have no idea who these people are. You have no relations to them. You have no Clue where they came from, where they were born, who they are. Nothing. Completely blank. Consumers like you and me are fundamentally alienated from the creative process of everything that they purchase, even items that perform a specific function in your lives. Since we no longer have to actually make the stuff that we use every day, we don't ever have to consider all of the other people, all of the expertise, all of the design process to make those Armani jeans or the making of your cool archive clothing a reality.

Speaker 4 • 27:47
What I'm really trying to get at here is that a lot of things have been alienated from us, from the design process to the production process to where it's made, who made it, how it was constructed. Like, all these things we don't think about. And it's something that we really do have to, like, really, really think about and realize how these things have come to existence because we're so alienated from the production process of things that we just kind of buy it. It's a.

Speaker 1 • 28:16
Okay, so we see here this. He is converted. He has been converted by reading about commodity fetishism. He's using the words, right? He's saying we're alienated from the processes. This is often called the social relations of production. That means basically the people who make the things that we use. He says we're so alienated from them, we don't know where they come from. The labor that is congealed in, for example, the chairs that you are sitting in, that labor is invisible to us. Marx would say that is a problem. It's interesting this youtuber says now that we no longer make everything that we use. I think it's been a very, very long time since we've, at least in the place where this youtuber is operating out of North America. It's been a very long time since people have made every single thing that they use. But I. But what Marx would say and what he says elsewhere in Capital is in the past, we often knew many of the people who made the things that we use, and we often.

Speaker 1 • 29:17
This is in relation to Susan Falls article from last Wednesday. We often made things and sold them to other people and also could buy the things that we participated in making. Susan Falls says many people who participate in the contemporary demolition derby cannot buy the cars that they make in the factories where they work. And so that is also, Marx Vitalis, a form of alienation. The inability to see the social relations that make up the products that we use. And. And also an inability to make something and then sell it yourself to other people. Even Mark says at one point, make it from beginning to end. He's very into that, making an entire product. He's concerned about the kind of moral and psychological costs of assembly line work. And he says also many people, like Susan Falls says one hundred years later, over one hundred years later, make things that they cannot buy.

Speaker 1 • 30:17
And that, Mark says, seems also to be a concerning form of alienation. And watch one more video from this youtuber.

Speaker 4 • 30:26
What we experience is a finished product sitting on the shelf. Which means that we don't necessarily see the witchcraft that went into making these things that we're buying. We don't know anything about the people that made it. And we aren't thinking about all the complex social agreements that determine the things value. On the surface level, when we buy a pair of shoes, we just think, hey, I'm buying a nice pair of shoes right now. And the shoes that you're buying are these clothes, cool panda dunks that you're going to be going crazy on them with all these outfits that you're going to be wearing with them. But we're not thinking, wow, I can't wait to go home and wrap my feet in this symbolic representation of social relations and abstract labor. No, in practice we just don't think that like that's crazy. I think that's just way beyond a lot of people's thought process.

Speaker 4 • 31:02
Right? We just think they're awesome shoes and you can't just wait to wear them. This is commodity fetishism though, because as consumers we're so separated from the complex production and complex social position positioning of the stuff we buy. We are forced to confer qualities that are determined socially onto the commodities themselves. In practice, we start to think that the things themselves are special, not that they merely appear special socially. Social appearance means more to us about something's value than the material it was made out of. Delusion matters more to us than the truth. The exchange value of an item in the marketplace matters more to us than anything to do with how useful it is to us and when.

Speaker 1 • 31:38
Okay, so we have a very interesting quote here. We start to see that things. Look, we start to see things as special in themselves and not as special socially. This is also part of the fetishism, right? The scene of things, of commodities, as if they exist in themselves. And the inability to see the social relations that make some things much more valuable than others, not because of the material that went into them, but because, for example, a celebrity sponsored or collaborated on the production of a shoe. This is the example that he's Interested in here? Okay, so I'd like us then to resummarize for you commodity fetishism. Then I'd like us to do an example, to look at an example together in regards to AI. So commodity fetishism, treating commodities again as if they exist on their own, as if they have. You'll hear this if you take a philosophy class in ontological existence.

Speaker 1 • 32:49
It basically just means that they exist on their own. Where they come from, irrelevant, doesn't matter. They didn't come from anywhere. Commodity fetishism misses as a result that commodities are the result of human labor and specifically relationships of labor, or what philosophers writing the tradition of Marx call the social relations of labor. This labor becomes invisible. It is contained in the object in which it is congealed. But then that object somehow effaces or erases it. And this is concerning for Marx. You heard this from the youtuber fashion elitist, because it alienates people from one another and it obscures unequal relations of production. It obscures the extraction of labor that is uncompensated or that is poorly compensated. Value does not go to the laborer. And Marx sees this as morally dangerous. Of course, the world that he was writing in, the nineteenth century world, radically different from our world today.

Speaker 1 • 34:00
But in many ways the relations we could argue have simply reached different heights. The unequal relations of productions of production, an idea that is also of course debated and contested. But the structure that Marx is identifying is one that I think is clearly continuous. Okay, so let's take a moment to look at some examples. So very. This is a famous chart anatomy of an AI system. Like you all to take a moment, you can look at this on your computer if you Google Anatomy system. It's also linked from our PDF for class today. And I'd like you to just look at and talk with the people around you about the type of work that goes into the AI tools that we use. What types of labor you see. And thinking in the vein of Marx and the lefticaliens, the nineteenth century philosophers who were concerned about these questions, what moral risks might someone consider?

Speaker 1 • 35:05
Just take about a minute or two to do this and then I'm interested in hearing from you.

Speaker 2 • 35:14
Okay, First of all,

Speaker 1 • 35:42
If anyone's not able to find the map, please let me know. Most of you have found it. Did you just Google anatomy of the AI map? Yeah,

Speaker 2 • 36:49
I mean making like an AI is like raising a baby basically because they, they don't know anything outside. And if you feed it the wrong information, they're just gonna go like south immediately. So. I mean, until like open AI got like chatgpt, like current models, they had to like purge like many other. Because they like went, you know, based or like, I don't know, racist or like other stuff basically until they got like a semi, non, partial model.

Speaker 1 • 37:40
Okay, so what does this map show us? It's an attempt to kind of lay bear what nineteenth century philosophers would call. Right. The congealed kind of human labor. Also resources. Yeah.

Speaker 5 • 38:06
And it will cause the programmers to work, overload longer time and always work night to their healthy, healthy body and mental health problem. And also that a lot of energy. That a lot of.

Speaker 1 • 38:36
Super interesting. So human labor also use laboring. Humans sometimes have to labor for long periods of time. And so very interesting comment. Also on the housing. Right. Construction of housing, sometimes for people. Also construction of data centers. Super interesting. So you have kind of this physical space aspect. Other things that you noticed. Yeah.

Speaker 6 • 39:03
Zada is gathered from people because obviously the AI needs to process, you know, for the training set. A lot of texts, you know, so much, you know, whatever kind of content is, you know, visual material content. Often, you know, this people talk about privacy, about control over this. You know, people who, you know, for instance, artists, people who draw things, whether it's okay to use their work to train an AI. So that's the way in which labor might be.

Speaker 1 • 39:32
Exceptionally interesting point. Right. The human labor that AI draws upon. Absolutely. Is often in made invisible. This is something that artists, as you just mentioned, have taken issue with. Screenwriters, for example, have taken serious issue with this. This was a major kind of sticking point in some of the contract negotiations recently among screenwriters and Hollywood. For instance, in the United States, it's also an extraction of rare earth minerals. Right. There is also the need to extract rare earth minerals, to transport them. Right. To transform them. So we see here the many kind of different layers of human labor of relations, social relations of labor that come into play. I did just want to finish by mention mentioning to you how some people have tried to make these social relations of labor visible. Some of you may have shopped at Everlane, Everlane, one of a number of stores that does this, tried to have transparent pricing.

Speaker 1 • 40:41
There's also something called traceable clothing. Very interesting. Where your garment has a story. You can see here a person holding a sign, I know who made my clothes. Which kind of alleviates this kind of feeling potentially of moral concern about the elision of the relations of production. Right. The kind of potential unequal relations that are behind the things that we use. It is quite interesting to notice to note that sometimes certain types of labor are privileged over others in these particular kinds of ventures. So often people who gathered or picked the raw material, sold the item in the store, packaged the item to be sent to the consumer, specifically, it was bought online. That labor would not be highlighted, but the person kind of sewed or made the physical garment itself, put it together. That labor would be highlighted.

Speaker 1 • 41:37
Okay, so for Wednesday, we're going to be reading an excerpt from a very famous piece.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Exploring Social Class, Cultural Capital, and Habitus through Bourdieu
Mar 27, 2026, 11:01 AM • 42 mins

SUMMARY KEYWORDS
social class, Pierre Bourdieu, cultural capital, habitus, etiquette, taste, food and class, sports and class, social mobility, education, cotillion, handshake, class performance, identity, family dynamics

SPEAKERS
Speaker 1, Speaker 2, Speaker 3, Speaker 4, Speaker 5, Speaker 6

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Speaker 1 • 00:01
Demi tells us that her son is trying to act preppy. Right. Trying to act like she's a member of a superior social. Social class to her. And she says, but I know. I know the truth. I know that he is of the social class that I am. So what does this tell us? Tells us a lot of things. Tells us that class is changeable, maybe in some ways. Tells us that class is also tied up with a bunch of emotions, identity, maybe in a way that's similar to how race and ethnicity may be tied up. Very affective or emotional relationship. Tammy seems to experience it as kind of a feeling of. As a kind of betrayal when her son, she says, tries to act like he's of a superior social class. How does he try to act like he is the superior social class? She says, he tries to act preppy. But how does he try to act preppy? He doesn't view his clothes. Absolutely. He wears, she says, high preppy outfits.

Speaker 1 • 01:14
You have this word preppy comes from the word for anyone who doesn't know it. Prep school. So kind of an elite high school. So a high school that would be attended by people who have a lot of resources. What does Mac tell us about his little brother Bo?

Speaker 2 • 01:46
Yeah.

Speaker 1 • 01:48
On what he's wearing. Absolutely. That Bo sometimes doesn't get the memo. Bo sometimes doesn't dress preppy, doesn't dress the way that Mac dresses. And so Mac says, well, sometimes I say that I don't know him. People are like, is that your brother? And I say, no, I don't know him. We actually see Mac's friend do something to Bo. Did anyone notice that? Max says to his friend, hey, come here. Yeah. He fixes his posture. Yeah. He's basically like, hey, stand up straight. Also a means by which these people, and many of us as well, potentially unconsciously, potentially conscious, participate in performing a particular class position. We see that Bo isn't wearing a shirt. Mack has done his hair right. He seems to be wearing an undershirt. He's wearing kind of a vest thing over it. There's a chain. So we see here Ste studied ways that Mack is trying to change his class position.

Speaker 1 • 03:13
What does Mack tell us about his mom? Yeah, she wears her Burger King outfit basically everywhere. A little bit understandable, considering that she works there. She has to walk, if you guys remember, kind of shocking, about five miles each way to and from her job. So it takes her like two to three hours a day to get to and from work because she walks. But he says, my mom is always wearing either the burger King top or the Burger King pants. Even, quote, if she goes to a nice restaurant, she still dresses that way. And so this conflicts with what Beau thinks. Bo thinks, for example, we see here that what one wears to work is not what one should probably wear to a social event, to a nice restaurant. He doesn't do that. And this creates a certain amount of tension that's very uncomfortable to watch because we also see that Mac is ashamed of his mother and has great internalized ideas about class that identify her as a kind of source of interest that he is trying to, in some ways, we could say, perform his way out of.

Speaker 1 • 04:33
So, class, as Pierre Bourdieu will tell us today, we're going to look at some examples. I'm going to share some examples with you from my own life. We'll look at some media examples. Class is something that we can try to perform or change knowingly and probably that we also are constantly trying to change or perform unknowingly in implicit ways. Okay, we're going to shift to talking about Pierre Bourdieu, but I want to take a moment to do participation for today. One more minute. All good? Okay, so we're gonna talk the rest of class today about our reading. A reading is from a French sociologist. French sociology, incredibly similar to American sociocultural anthropology. Pierre Bourdieu died a little bit over twenty years ago. Was a major French public intellectual. When I studied abroad in France when I was in college, the family that I was staying with was a member of the political.

Speaker 1 • 06:34
They were in the French political elite. And they were very proud to tell me that they had once swum in a swimming pool with Pierre Borcheva. He was so famous that people who were politicians knew him. This often happened to academics, and he's very well known for his arguments about capital. We're going to see him again next week, and I'm going to give you a kind of brief summary that we're going to revisit it, and hopefully you'll have a grasp, initial grasp on what he means. He's interested in different kinds of capital that people have. Social capital, economic capital, and cultural capital. Economic capital is what you think it is. It is money. It is assets, things that you own, investments, social capital, our social networks. It is the people that you know, the people that you can call upon to help you directly, or perhaps people that you know who can call upon other people to help you with something that is important, that is social capital.

Speaker 1 • 07:43
It is a social one, social network. And what we're going to talk about Today is what Pierre Bourgieu calls cultural capital. It is the things that you do in the world, the things that you know how to do, probably because you learned how to do it as a child or when you were at school, you were maybe explicitly taught to do it, or perhaps you just saw other people. And this includes things like eating, speaking, dressing, greeting people, shaking hands with people that you meet. We're going to see an example of that in a second. Cultural capital is basically about how we are in the world, what we do, particularly in social interactions, and how that indexes our class position. And I also want to mention something else about Pierre Borgia that I think is really interesting, just as a side note, which is that he was very concerned about the French educational system.

Speaker 1 • 08:52
One of his major kind of intellectual projects or political projects was to identify the lack of what he saw. What he saw as the lack of meritocracy in the French educational system, the fact that schooling should be the place where cultural capital is equally distributed and where, in his opinion, it was not. And so he was a real kind of promoter of school reform in France, but he also thought that education was one of the only means of social mobility available to the poorer classes. And he himself was a member of the poorer classes. He was a peasant. He ascended. He came from a peasant background. He ascended into the highest ranks of the French intellectual and political elite. And he had this very particular positionality where he describes going to school and being mocked for his kind of countryside accent. He describes how he wasn't able to go home to see his family when he was enrolled as a kind of scholarship student in an elite school.

Speaker 1 • 10:14
And so he had to wear kind of. He had special clothing that he wore as a boarder, as someone who didn't go home, whose family didn't provide fashionable clothes for him. And so Pierre Bourdieu comes to these conversations as someone who knows the working class in France in the sixties, in the fifties and sixties, the time that he is writing about and what we read for today. And he is also someone who knows the upper classes because he went to school with them, and he was able to join them by his acquisition in part of this thing we're going to talk about today called cultural capital. And Bourdieu is asking very big questions. He's asking questions that are relevant to all of us. Why do we like the things that we like? Why do we play the sports that we play? Why do we think that these particular sports, the kind of sports that someone like me would play, why do we dress the way that we dress?

Speaker 1 • 11:17
Why do we think that this is how someone like me should dress? This is the kind of self representation that I would like to project into the world. And also the food that we eat. What food do we consider to be edible and why? What food do we consider to not really be edible or perhaps not edible by someone like me? And why? And what we read for. Excuse me, what we read for today is an excerpt from a book from nineteen seventy nine called Distinction. And it's based on his own experience growing up in France in the fifties and his field work in France in the nineteen sixties. And if you google him, you'll find. And again, and I mentioned this earlier, he loves maps. He maps out social classes, he maps out particular. Foods, just like Gastronomica did here. This is from two thousand and twelve in relationship to class. And so you can see here a reproduction of a food space chart.

Speaker 1 • 12:38
And we have on here lunch trucks, steak brunch buffet, Michelin starred restaurants. And we have also these different kinds of capital, specifically economic capital. So the means to purchase cultural capital, which is what is one. What one is kind of trained explicitly or implicitly, simply by watching other people to do what kind of food they're trained to eat. And so I'd like you to consider with the people around you, this first question. When you sit at a table with multiple sets of silverware, do you know which utensil to use when? And if you do, where did you learn? And if you don't, how might you feel? How might you deal with a situation? So just take out thirty seconds, talk to the people around you about these questions and also circulate. How would you answer this question? Standard.

Speaker 3 • 14:35
Yeah,

Speaker 1 • 14:56
It's outside to end words, isn't it? I mean most, in most situations it, as I have done, start at the outside. Okay, I'm interested in hearing from you. I've heard some interesting things from your colleagues in the back. What would you do if you sat at a table and you had these utensils in front of you? First of all, maybe a show of hands, how many people maybe have learned this before and they would know where to start? Some people, yes. I was talking to someone just about how I've been in a situation like this and I dealt with this situation in a particular way. How did those of you who didn't know when you first encountered this, how did you deal with it?

Speaker 4 • 15:38
Yeah, well, I know that my dad, he lived in India for most of his life until he was like, like twenty five and when he was twenty five, like his company sent him and a couple other people to like London to like work there for a little bit, just for a couple months. And one of the things that like they had him and his colleagues, my mom and I, so like we find it really bizarre. But apparently like the last group of people that they sent over, like they've been sent back because their table etiquette wasn't amazing. So before my dad was, before my dad and like his colleagues were able to go to London, they had to go through like proper, like float, like not full on editing classes but like, you know, like how to drink soup popular, like which fork is which and which spoon is which and like the like classic like western table settings. And so I mean that's still something.

Speaker 1 • 16:35
He doesn't use it because we don't

Speaker 4 • 16:37
use them all the time. But that's where I guess I'd have learned. But it's how he learned.

Speaker 1 • 16:43
So he taught you, did he teach you explicitly?

Speaker 4 • 16:45
No, it's like we're at dinner and my mom and I come like, why do the new foods?

Speaker 1 • 16:49
And he's like, well actually, actually super interesting. So your colleague says their father from India sent to London for a job and actually had an explicit training program. This is how you eat these particular types of food. This is how you eat soup. This is the utensil that you use. Use the big spoon, not the small spoon. Etc. And then your colleague being at dinner with their father, father said, aha. I can actually tell you this is how you do it. This is how you use these different utensils. Some people, Pierre Bourdieu tells us, don't ever necessarily have to be explicitly told that or perhaps do not remember being explicitly told that because they were young and so they grow up eating this way. This is intuitive to them. Other people may Google it, may find themselves at a dinner like this and Google how do you use all of these different utensils?

Speaker 1 • 17:46
What about our second question? Do you know how to properly eat an oyster, a lobster, a shrimp in its shell, caviar? Question for people who drink alcohol, do you know how to properly select wine and pair it with a meal? If so, where did you learn these things?

Speaker 5 • 18:05
Yeah, my dad is in the, the culinary industry as like a supplier for a lot of like fancy restaurants. And he specifically does like, like wild forage goods like mushrooms and like things like that. And so because of that he knows a lot of very like, like high end chefs and stuff. And so I've been to a lot

Speaker 4 • 18:27
of very nice restaurants.

Speaker 5 • 18:29
And so a kind of as a way to not feel as ostracized in the environment. I have learned to like the proper way to eat a lot of like, like fancier foods just through being in that environment. Because it is such a, like, because I like, that's not like my family's class level at all, but because we're in that environment and it's something that is also like a passion of my dad's, just good food in general. I end up kind of like not explicitly learning it, but kind of observing and learning over time because I've been there as a way to fit into it.

Speaker 1 • 19:11
Super interesting. Thank you for sharing that. So your colleague says their father works in the culinary industry and so they've had access specifically to high end restaurants where these kinds of food are consumed and to kind of very interesting framing, like to kind of fit in. Right. Because if you're in that experience and you don't know how to eat these particular foods, you feel like you dick out.

Speaker 2 • 19:37
Right.

Speaker 1 • 19:37
And so your colleague learned how to read to eat these particular foods through that process. I imagine maybe as a, as like a child, like a teenager. Yeah. Ten on. Okay, super interesting. Yeah. Are you going to give an example? Yeah, Super interesting. So learning. Your colleagues specifically learn from their mother how to select wine, even if they themselves do not drink. But what kind of wine goes with what kind of food?

Speaker 6 • 20:48
Yeah, when I was little, my parents made me go to cotillion, which is basically someone teaching you all of this. And like I remember that was like fourth or fifth grade and they were teaching like tiny children how to like pair wine correctly or like peel a shrimp or something. And yeah, that. So that was me as a little kid. But it's just like those kinds of skills. And I mean, I don't really remember them because I was. Didn't care and was like a child. But I think it really says something about the kinds of people who like go to cotillion and who are able to learn those things because you learn

Speaker 1 • 21:28
them from a young age. Absolutely. So cotillion, I think that one pays to participate, maybe has to be invited to participate as well. The cousin who did this, so I heard a little bit about it. You can see here the types of things that are taught. Dining etiquette, rules and taboos, the power, first impressions, the foxtrot, the waltz. I do love that. Advanced dining, social dating, etiquette. This is a means by which Pierre Bourdieu would tell us cultural capital is explicitly transferred to a Select group of people which serves to reproduce the class structure, keeping the people at the top. At the top. Pierre Bourgeois would say, right, he did not go to Cotillon in the sense that he was not invited. He. He did not have the means to pay. But he did go to an elite high school. And he learned, he says, many of these things by watching his peers and through class, through the classroom.

Speaker 1 • 22:43
So Pierre Borgiau makes an argument in this article, which I know is a challenge to read, so thank you for looking at it. He makes an argument about this thing called habitus. And habitus is about how class is mapped onto and performed through the body. Habitus is about how the body moves through the world, has to eat, it has to be covered, sometimes not covered in others. It plays, it works. And so how. How the body moves, what it does, its dispositions are tied profoundly, Borgia tells us, to class in ways that we can see, Right? I learned, for example, to eat oysters when I came to Boston. My family did not eat oysters growing up. It was also not a food that was very common in the place where I grew up. But I learned how to eat it in a very explicit way. I asked other people, how do you eat an oyster? But sometimes some of the ways that our bodies reveal class may be invisible to us and even to the people who look at us.

Speaker 1 • 24:09
Pir Borgia tells us that these bodily dispositions often appear to be natural, but in fact, they are socially produced, and they are learned. And often we see how they are learned when we see people trying to teach children or adults the rules explicitly. Cotillion an excellent example of that. I also want to show you another example. So this is a woman who travels around, misses Thompson, who travels around, and she teaches grade schoolers, specifically grade schoolers who are in poor elementary schools, social skills. And we're going to watch an example of that right now.

Speaker 2 • 25:00
Then you shake. One, two, three, and your leg goes back. Okay? Remember, one, two, three. Don't have that leg back when you're still shaking. Okay? You do this. One, two, three. Then your leg and arm goes back. Everybody saw that. Okay? You ready? Okay. One, two, three. Okay, now, while you're shaking my hand, I need you to look me in the eyes because. Because you're meeting me. Okay? You're doing great so far. Let's go. One, two, three. Hold me tightly. And you're back. Good job. Yes. Let's do that again. You're doing great. Ready? All right, everybody watch her. Encourage her. Ready? One. You're looking here. One, Two, three. Yes. Now we're going to add introduction. Okay, everybody. Now we're going to add introduction, where you're going to introduce yourself to me. Remember, we're supposed. We don't say my name is. What are we supposed to say?

Speaker 2 • 26:19
Good job. I am. Are you ready? Yes, miss. Okay, one, two, three. Hello. How are you? Remember, you're supposed to ask me also, how are you? I'm doing well. And your name is? I am. Nice to meet you, Amaya. I am misses Thompson. Good job. So let's do that hand for the row. Everyone have a seat. Let's do our handshake one more time. One, two, three. Hold me tightly. Look me in the eyes. Good job. Yes. Have a seat. Everyone have a seat.

Speaker 1 • 27:13
Okay, so what do we see? This is Thompson teaching these kids here, Teaching them a handshake. How does she teach them the handshake? What does she say about the handshake? Yeah, Have you ever thought about a handshake before in that way? No. She's like, you need to step forward and then step back. She says, firm handshake, culturally contingent. I can tell you having shook the hands of a number of my Tunisian interlocutors very firmly when I first started my research, I realized afterwards that many people do not shake hands very firmly. Culturally contingent in the United States. Firm handshake. So she tells them, firm handshake. What else does she say? Yeah, hold me tightly. Absolutely, hold the hand tightly. Where's the child supposed to look? Yeah, absolutely into misses Thompson's eyes. Understandably, the kid is like, okay, I have to be shaking her hand.

Speaker 1 • 28:33
The child's watching the hand, right? And misses Thompson says, look me in my eyes. It's important to make eye contact. And then she has an exchange where the child is supposed to introduce herself. She says, don't say, my name is you. Say, I am. Interesting. This is an explicit rendering of something that this particular educator says elsewhere. She worries many children learn from parents who have access to more what Pierre Bourdieu would call cultural capital and who also have access to more economic capital that allows them to be consistently present. And so this is how she tries to make up for this gap in cultural capital. And you can see how embodied it is, right? The handshake. Step forward, step back. So we've talked about cotillion clubs. We're going to continue. So what I'd like you to note here is how much class is tied for Borgia to the body, to how it moves in space, to unspoken norms that often we can see Only when someone maybe violates them or.

Speaker 1 • 29:56
Or when someone like misses Thompson has analyzed them and lays them out for us because she's trying to teach them to someone else explicitly. Bourdieu is interested in helping us see that it's not natural or commonsensical to, for example, shake someone's hand very firmly. It is a cultural rule that in a particular cultural context, indexes one's position as an insider, and as an insider who is, in this case, misses Thompson hope, socially mobile. It's not commonsensical to shake someone's hand more firmly. Right. In other contexts, the rule is actually different. Okay, So Pierre Bourdieu calls our attention specifically to preferences, what he calls taste to ideas about what is natural, good, right, or fitting for me. And I wanted to show you this moment that's a little bit hard to read, but I want to show you how you actually do understand what he is saying.

Speaker 1 • 31:20
So he says here, taste is the source of a system of distinctive features which cannot fail to be perceived as a systematic expression of a particular class of conditions of existence, a distinctive lifestyle. So taste is the source of a system of distinctive features, a distinctive lifestyle. It continuously transforms necessities into strategies, constraints into preferences, and it generates the set of choices constituting lifestyles. What Bourdieu is pointing to us here is that in fact, what we are often told to like, we are told is good for us, is proper for us, is commonsensical for us is an imposition that we then take on as something that we like or that we want or that we also see as fitting or proper. Probably sounds familiar. Sounds a little bit like Althusser, like Gramsci from our week on the State. How we often take on ideas from the outside, impositions from the outside.

Speaker 1 • 32:40
We internalize them and we adopt them. We, as Foucault says, we discipline ourselves. And so we participate in what Bourgiou says is a class system by seeing what we are told to like as in fact what we do like, what we prefer, what we should like. And so then through taste, an agent has what he likes because he likes what he has. He accepts the prescription and transforms that prescription into something that he has chosen. I want to spend the rest of class talking to you about food and sports. Bourdieu tells us about food in nineteen sixties France. He tells us about working class and bourgeois foods. What are some of the things that he says characterizes a working class meal?

Speaker 2 • 33:57
Yeah,

Speaker 1 • 34:07
Absolutely. He says in working class nineteen sixties France, in his field work, he saw working class Families put all the food on the table at once. The food was left on the table. Right. It was kind of of a labor saving mechanism. People could come in and eat when they needed to. The family would often gather on the table. But some people might start before others. And so there was a certain amount of freedom. There's no strict sequencing of parts of the meal. What does he say about a bourgeois meal in nineteen sixties France and his field work?

Speaker 2 • 34:48
Yeah,

Speaker 1 • 34:51
absolutely. So whereas we have copious portions in the working class meal. Very good point. In the bourgeois meal, we have smaller portions. There's a perception of order and timing. The food is brought out in kind of sequence. Right. One after the other. Different utensils are used for different meals. The eating is also ordered differently. The dishes are often staged in a particular way. Yeah, excellent. So I'll show you this very briefly. I want us to watch a video Ramadan meal that I ate earlier this year. And we have here some good examples of how a meal is made to feel, quote, unquote, fancy in this context. I think in many other contexts, which is that there is a sequence of different courses. There's an aesthetic presentation of the food. There's an aesthetic presentation of the dining space. There are multiple utensils that are available and the food is served by other people.

Speaker 1 • 36:10
Whereas working class meals, Borgia tells us, are defined by the saving of as much labor as possible. People are tired, specifically the labor of men. Here we have people outside of those eating, serving the food. I also want to show you an excerpt from Always Be My Maybe. So this is a. I think it's a film. It's a film, yeah, from twenty nineteen. Basically, Ali Wong starts dating at one point, Keanu Reeves. And I'd like you to watch this excerpt of Keanu Reeves eating food. We might, might end with this. Let's see.

Speaker 3 • 36:55
You look good.

Speaker 1 • 36:57
Wet.

Speaker 3 • 36:57
You look good. Let's feast.

Speaker 1 • 37:03
Hey, Charles.

Speaker 3 • 37:04
Good to see you again, mister Reeves. Me too. Hey, may I ask, do you have any dishes that play with time, the concept of time? Ah, yes. We have a meat course of venison sous vide. Comes with headphones so you can hear the sound of the exact animal you are about to consume. Soon, illustrating nature's life to death cycle. And of course, everything you see on the table tonight is edible.

Speaker 2 • 37:32
Yes.

Speaker 1 • 37:35
Wait, so it's this?

Speaker 3 • 37:36
No, not the napkin, sir.

Speaker 1 • 37:38
Don't eat the napkin. Marcus.

Speaker 3 • 37:42
Micro greens and lettuces, encapsulated and served with dehydrated seaweed and dried fish legs.

Speaker 1 • 37:48
Sorry.

Speaker 3 • 37:48
Fish food.

Speaker 1 • 37:49
Fish flakes. Right. Which is fish food.

Speaker 3 • 37:52
We lightly scale the body of the fish as it swims, collecting the particles it sheds into the ocean.

Speaker 1 • 37:56
Oh, got it. So it's fish dandruff,

Speaker 3 • 38:03
Clear asparagus soup extracted with centrifuge, the all black monochrome course, the flavor of Caesar satin.

Speaker 1 • 38:49
I'm sorry. Okay, so what is Keanu Reeves character doing here? Keanu Reeves, what is he doing with food in this particular excerpt? Absolutely. So here Keanu Reeves is performing, we could say a class physician, through his consumption of food. This is not the copious food consumption that Bourdieu describes as associated with working class food practices in which the nutrition for the body is primary. Right. The body needs to be fed so the body can labor. Instead, here we see food as a kind of aesthetic experience, which is what bourgeois tells us. Bourgeois meals, French meals in the nineteen sixties were about, and I think also very true today. It's an aesthetic experience, but it's also a moral experience. Right. Keanu Reeves is using food here to push himself ethically and morally. He listens to. It's a moose. The moose that he's eating.

Speaker 1 • 40:23
Eating. Or the deer, some kind of game meat. He listens to that animal while he is eating the animal. So we have here a kind of subversion, right, of the typical relationship of food with nourishment, which Bourdieu would tell us is typical of bourgeois eating practices. Okay, finally we're going to end with talking about sports. So Bourdieu tells us strict health oriented practices like walking and jogging are tied to the dispositions of the culturally richest fractions of the middle classes and the dominant class. Basically, the classes that are able to do these exercises that we've talked about this earlier on in the semester have no particular purpose other than the crafting, the shaping of the body. There is not a labor that is performed through this walking or jogging. And specifically I wanted to end by mentioning golf. Here is an article from Golf Science Journal which cites Bourdieu.

Speaker 1 • 41:39
As Bourdieu has argued, there are hidden entry requirements to golf, including family socialization and early training. Golf has been used as a vehicle by the upper classes to detach themselves from other classes and gain power and influence. I'll just note here, this is what Borjieu tells us. He tells us that golf, among other particular sports, has a restriction of movement. It was an individualized sport, is not a team sport. All of these characteristics lend it to a higher class identification. And he also tells us that early training, family tradition, socialization, manner of dress and behavior and access to elite spaces facilitate performance or participation in golf. And I do just want to mention I've mentioned this before. This is my father. He grew up not in an elite social class, but used golf as a means of social mobility.

Speaker 1 • 42:43
He learned to play golf as an adult and then played it with people that he worked with. Okay, on Monday of next week, we're going to be reading Karl Marx. A little bit of a challenging piece, but please do.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Role of Markets in Solving Information Problems and Driving Innovation
Mar 23, 2026, 12:27 PM • 51 mins

SUMMARY KEYWORDS
Hayek, information problem, market process, supply and demand, market equilibrium, market design, auction mechanisms, Pareto efficiency, efficient market hypothesis, arbitrage, Keynesian beauty contest, market power, competition, innovation, antitrust, intellectual property, Schumpeter, dynamic competition, inclusive institutions

SPEAKERS
Speaker 1

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Speaker 1 • 00:00
Or who had a lot to say about what markets do, what problems they solve. Is this Friedrich Hayek, who we asked you to read about? Okay. And Hayek's notion of markets and what markets are and aren't is related to this information problem. Right. So Hayek wanted to compare market to a process. In the era when were sort of attractive as ideas for political and economic systems. Linking back to last week's readings in Michael. Right. Recall, there was this era of laissez faire capitalism in the United States that led to some kinds of bad outcomes, lots of inequality, lots of volatility in the market. Okay. So. And people were thinking like, maybe, maybe we should have more centralized planning or more social equipment. Hayeks sort of said, the big problem with that idea is that it's impossible for a social planner to collect all the information required to decide what to do.

Speaker 1 • 01:08
You're going to see an example of this this week when you read about pencil collection. Okay. The idea reading is a little weird. You'll read it and you'll sort of get the idea, I think. But when you start, you're going to. Why am I reading this thing about the pencil? The point is to ask, get yourself to ask, like, how do we know? How do we organize people to produce something? Could be a pencil or a computer or whatever. What are all the inputs? Say, does this click? Okay, well, first somebody has to decide, you know, we're going to have central planning. Someone has to know how many clickers to make, right? And then they have to sort of make a plastic that goes into the. What goes into the plastic? The plastic is produced by sort of collecting a bunch of outputs from petrochemical manufacturing. So how do we know who to send those to? And there's a bunch of labor used in the petrochemical manufacturing, right?

Speaker 1 • 02:05
And then those people use, you know, steel vessels to make the plastic. And, you know, we have to source. The point is you can go on and on and on and the set of inputs to produce anything, simple as a pencil or a clicker, just branches out backwards until it's this massive number of decisions that have to be made. And it's really difficult to imagine the loss. Whether that's, you know, me or the dean, president of the university, the president of the country, sort of figuring out all of the stuff that we need to know to decide, like who's going to make what, who's going to get what, how are we going to allocate it. Hayek's insight going back to Hayek was that this Problem of knowing. For an entire society to know how much of anything is produced, it can be solved in a decentralized way by letting firms and individuals respond to market prices. So Hayek's insight was that, hey, prices and markets can be a solution to this information problem.

Speaker 1 • 03:10
How do you know what to make? Well, firms, they have their own little localized knowledge. I know something about say, how much, how to make plastic, and the only thing I have to do is not decide like how much plastic goes to clicker manufacturers and exactly what kind. The firm just says, I can profitably sell my plastic to this customer, and if I can do that, I'm going to go ahead and do it. And an individual only has to know what they want to consume. And as long as they're available to access the product at a price below their willingness to pay, they can go ahead and do it. So acting in this decentralized, independent way produces changes in quantities and prices in markets. They contain information about the cost of producing stuff and the quantity demanded. And that information altogether constitutes all of the prices send the right signals to solve this knowledge problem.

Speaker 1 • 04:09
In other words, markets are fantastic at getting society organized to produce the things people want and the amounts they want at prices they're willing to pay is without having to collect a ton of information and send it all to a social planner. In fact, if you think about this problem today, you know, sort of I would put it to you, like think about whether you even would send chatgpt off to solve this problem. Do you think chatgpt could tell us how much of everything to produce and who to send it to and organize the entire economy? Even if it's smarter than us, I suspect it would show the way we have solved it for years is to rely on market prices. So this way of thinking, Hayek's sort of information problem perspective on markets, has been really central to basically libertarian thinking and philosophy. The more free market approach or capitalist approach to political economy really sort of triumphed over ideas of central plan in the middle of the twentieth century.

Speaker 1 • 05:15
And these folks sort of place a lot of emphasis not just on the fact that markets work well, but also on the idea that in markets people are free to make their own choices, right? So the ability to make decisions for yourself is viewed as a good on its own sort of freedom to choose, as Milton Friedman put it, right? And that's sort of a justification for organizing social activity in markets as frequently as we can. We should rely on markets, says Hayek and others, to organize business activity, production, allocation of goods, and services in an economy. And that's been a central idea in US and Western European political systems for the last several hundred years. So why do we think this works? Right? This is kind of a high level perspective. Hayek says markets do this. Why do we think markets actually do this? Let's get down to the nitty gritty for at least a few minutes.

Speaker 1 • 06:15
How many of you have seen this picture? At least some at some point. Okay, most of you, if you haven't. One way to remember, supplies of the sky, demands of the sand, these two curves, you know, one goes up, one goes down. The other, everything's kind of un. You have the solution to the problem on your homework when the two of them cross each other here. Okay, since you've all seen it, somebody tell me, what is this? What's the demand curve? Let's just pick demand for a second. What is it? Literally? How should I understand it? Yeah, Isn't it like how much consumers are willing to pay at a certain. Or how much they're willing to buy at a certain price? Okay, what do you mean? Nas? Nas. NAS says how much consumers are willing to buy at a given price. So it gives us a relationship between some number of consumers and a price level. That's a good answer. Very good answer.

Speaker 1 • 07:08
Yeah. I would like to say that scarcity also increases demand. And like quantity increases quantity also decreases it maybe. Okay, scarcity increases demand. So. So as something is scarce, actually what we think of often as scarcity increases price. If there's not a lot of quantity available, then that leads to a higher price. Because what's going on is only the people who want to pay the most are the ones who buy it. So the answer I would give, the way I think you should try to understand the demand curve is that it's just a bunch of people or a bunch of firms. It's a bunch of buyers. It's. And they're lined up in order of their willingness to pay. Right? So think about all of you in this room. If I was going to auction off, you know, a product, a coffee mug, you all have some willingness to pay. Some of you are willing to pay five bucks because you need a mug.

Speaker 1 • 08:02
Some of you are willing to pay one cent because you really don't care. Sometimes, like when I'm teaching this, I will get everybody in the room to come up and stand on the stage and I'll say, all right, let's figure out who's willing to pay the most for this thing. That's you. Who's willing to pay the second most, that's you. And we line people up on the stage and I say, there it is. That's your demand curve. The demand curve is a bunch of buyers sorted by willingness to pay. And that's why this goes down. What's the supply curve then? The supply curve is a bunch of sellers sorted by a willingness to accept or cost. That's why the supply curve goes up. This firm is willing to sell at a low price because it has low costs, Right? As you move up, this business is willing to sell at a little bit higher price because it has higher costs and so forth. That's also buy and demand are supply and demand is just sort of a representation of buyers and sellers sorted by a willingness to pass or willingness to accept.

Speaker 1 • 09:05
And then what's going on here, where they meet, which is, you know, sort of. Lots of people get lost in solving the algebra, like, oh, I gotta set p Q and solve the system of equations and all that stuff. What's really going on here is just the mark. We think markets end up at this spot because of individual decisions about buying and selling. Kind of like I was just saying about buying. So what happens? What would. Why do we think the market ends up here? Well, what would happen if price was high? Imagine the price was here instead of at the green line. There would be fewer people who want to buy right at a higher price, and there would be more firms that want to sell. What tends to happen if there's a bunch of sellers who have something and there's not enough buyers for it, what happens to the price then? They've got to decrease their price. They get more buyers.

Speaker 1 • 10:03
If you're holding some good and there's not enough buyers, we tend to sort of say, well, I'm not finding a buyer for this thing. I don't have a better use for it. I'm going to lower my price. I'm going to accept a lower price. So if the price was too high, the excess of supply over demand is going to cause price to drop. And conversely, if we're down here, the price is low, okay, there's going to be an excess of buyers relative to sellers. So some of these sellers are going to be like, hey, I can come in and sell it at a higher price to people who haven't bought it yet. That's going to tend to raise the price. So what's going on is kind of Hayek's underlying idea of independent decisions of buyers to buy or not, firms to enter the market, market and sell or not. And when they respond to the price, the market is always moving towards this equilibrium. Maybe we're not there at any given point in time.

Speaker 1 • 10:56
It's kind of an abstraction. But this point here, where supply equals demand is an equilibrium. It's where market's clear. It's where things are stable. That's the idea of the classical market. And then this is how we get the solution to ix information problem. If you think about markets this way, then changes in the demand curve or changes in the supply curve, which happen because of outside forces, Right? So a change in the supply curve might be a hurricane comes along and wipes out a gas refinery in Texas. Well, what does that mean? That means we lose a bunch of these firms that are willing to sell at low cost. That means the supply curve shifts this way. This and price goes up and quantity goes down. What does it mean for the demand curve to change? It means something like, you guys are all hit by an advertising campaign and decide you really need a Labubu.

Speaker 1 • 11:53
Well, people are willing to pay more for Labubus. The demand curve shifts out. That means quantity goes up and prices go up. We shift along the supply curve. Those changes to levuku, jamaic or gasoline supply, they change the prices. That puts new information into the market. And then consumers and businesses respond. That's what's going on in a hypothetical ideal market. Now, in a real world, the question becomes, does a market work like the hypothetical ideal? Sometimes yes, sometimes no. Okay. And in fact, there's ways to make a market more like the hypothetical ideal or less like the hypothetical ideal. What are the conditions that we need to get markets to look like this? This is the question of market design, which is kind of an interesting new field in economics. The field of market design sort of thinks about, what are the rules for getting buyers and sellers to find each other?

Speaker 1 • 13:01
What are the rules for determining, like, what the price is or the terms of trade? How do you sort of make sure that the principle of voluntary change, right. Value, is only created when two parties agree voluntarily to enter into agreement? How do you preserve this? Let me give you an example to try and make this a little bit less abstract. Market design is intriguing in questions like, how do you run an auction? So I worked on an antitrust case two years ago now that had a lot to do with auctions. Every time you guys open an app or a browser and you see an advertisement. Not every time, but most of the time, there has been an auction that took place in the moment between when you clicked to see something and when the page appears, some software goes out and says, I have an opportunity to advertise to you. Okay? And then a bunch of advertisers actually submit bids.

Speaker 1 • 14:00
And those bids, the highest bidder gets to purchase the slot in the app or on the web page. Then when they win the auction, some software sends the advertisement to the web page, and then the whole thing shows up on your screen. All this happens in like the blink of an eye, faster than the page loads, right? And then the question emerges. How should you run these auctions? And there's been like an interesting kind of evolution of online ad auctions from what's called a second price auction format to a first price auction format. What's a first price auction format is what you see when you go to an auction for, like, you know, a piece of art or a yellow used car, and somebody's saying, like, do I have ten dollars? Do I have ten dollars? And somebody raises their hand, yes, and do I have twelve dollars? Anybody willing to bid twelve dollars? And we keep going until you reach the price at which no one is willing to bid any higher.

Speaker 1 • 14:53
And then the last bidder gets the object, right? That's called a first price auction. A second price auction is an auction where everybody just writes down what they're willing to bid to pay the amount that they would be willing to pay for the item on a piece of paper. And then the person who submits the highest bid is the winner, but they only pay the price of the second highest bid. So it's as if sort of we had bids of five, ten, fifteen, twenty. The person who bid twenty would win the auction, but they would only have to pay fifteen. So two different rules, two different mechanisms for determining who gets the object and what's the price. It turns out that you can show that second price and first price auctions generate exactly the same amount of revenue and expectations. Those two different rules, which seem really different, should be exactly the same from the perspective of a seller trying to raise the most money they can when selling an object.

Speaker 1 • 15:49
That's kind of a particular application of the ideas of market design more broadly, when you think about market design, there's a set of rules that we think make markets as well, that make markets resemble this hypothetical ideal. Most clearly. Those things are thickness markets where there are many buyers and many sellers, right? Think of the bazaar, if you can. If you don't like the price of grapes at one stall, you can go to the next stall, the next stall, the next, until you see the price and the quality that you like, right, so thickness, lots of opportunities to exchange. That leads to lots of currency. Competition that makes markets work well. Transparency, right? You know what the price is. You can observe the quality. There's a lot of information available to people who might want to transact in a market that makes a market work well.

Speaker 1 • 16:37
Simplicity and safety. We'd like everybody to follow the same rules. There should be some standards about how prices get set, and it should be safe. When you. When you start to enter into a transaction, the seller shouldn't be able to change the rules of the game on you, or the buyer shouldn't be able to sort of give you half the money and then walk away. The market, you should be safe in transacting. You should be able to understand what you're doing because the pricing and the qualities are transparent. The market is simple, and there's lots of buyers and sellers. These characteristics make markets function like this. Okay? And if you have a lot of markets that function like this, not just the market for whatever, agricultural products or clickers or pencils or whatever, but you got markets in everything, right? There is a way of illustrating kind of Hayek's insight that has been sort of, I guess, I'd say contemporary economics has shown that in the extreme, market can be an unbelievably efficient way, way of organizing production of goods and services.

Speaker 1 • 17:42
Right? So this is sort of the most extreme statement of why we think free markets are a great way of organizing production. It is sort of sometimes called the fundamental theorem for theorems of welfare economics. The idea of the welfare theorems is that under certain conditions, market outcomes are what's called Pareto efficient. Pareto efficient means I can't make any one of you better off without making someone else worse off. Stop and think about that for a second. So you have a whole group of people, a group of firms and individuals operating in a world with lots of markets. If we have free markets, if the markets resemble this, okay, then there's no way to make somebody better off. I can't sort of like, reallocate. I can't do anything to sort of improve someone's utility without making someone else worse off. It's kind of the best you can do without starting to get into really difficult questions about should I take money from this person and give it to that one, Right?

Speaker 1 • 18:49
So that's one welfare. The other welfare theorem, which is kind of interesting is related to this, is take any wealth distribution or income distribution that you want. Like, think back to our voting last week. You can get there through a market all you have to do is sort of redistribute the resources at the beginning and then use the market in a decentralized way to sort of set up outcomes. Right. Like, so this is a justification for the idea that even if you don't like the income distribution or the wealth distribution, we can use the governments to transfer money from one person to another, but we shouldn't use the government to make decisions, decisions about production or consumption. Right. Instead, governments can just sort of redistribute income and then we should let markets rip. Let them go. Right. And we'll get this kind of nice Pareto efficiency.

Speaker 1 • 19:37
The problem with this result is that, like, the conditions required are pretty extreme. Right? So what are the conditions to get Pareto efficiency or for markets to be as good as Hayek? So sometimes claimed you have to have complete markets, which means markets for everything. You have to have perfect information, which means no one has private information that someone else doesn't have. There's no agency problems. Everybody kind of knows all the relevant information. You have to have perfect competition. Right. Which in particular means businesses don't make any money. This is arguably something that should shock and horrify all of you business school students. We're going to move away from this in a minute. But to be clear, in a static market economy, we think the maximum efficiency occurs at the minimum profitability, and there should be no externalities.

Speaker 1 • 20:29
It can't be the case that my decision affects your welfare or vice versa. Next week we're going to talk about the ways in which these things fail, which leads to trade offs between using markets and using, using government regulation or rule setting to constrain activities or to provide other kinds of conditions that might make a market outcome work well for society. But this is the hypothetical ideal, okay? This is the reason why many more libertarian thinkers feel like the role of government should be extremely limited. Because if we can get markets to work like this, they produce fantastic outcomes. Okay, so then what do we need to do to make markets work that way and to get good outcomes? And there's two broad schools of thought on that. One is this school of thought, you know, sort of, I think, consistent with the libertarian Hayek, Adam Smith, Milton Friedman tradition.

Speaker 1 • 21:32
Right. I think there's universal agreement that government has a role to play in providing conditions like this. Okay? These kinds of things, market thickness, safety, transparency and simplicity. To get that, you need to at least have property rights and you need to have a rule of law and you need to have enforcement of law. And beyond that, there are Some kinds of shared infrastructure that market participants rely on, like some kinds of regulation, which we'll talk about next week. Provision of public goods like highways or sort of some level of basic education. Okay. All of that is, I think everyone agrees is necessary for markets to function. Well, going beyond that generates more controversy. But there's an idea that was in the readings that's been put important one about sort of the importance of inclusive institutional environments.

Speaker 1 • 22:28
If you look across different kinds of political and economic systems that rely on markets, the ones that have succeeded the most, arguably democracies that have inclusive institutions have tended to produce higher GDP per capita than those with less inclusive. What do we mean by inclusive institutions in addition to these things? Things like making sure that access to educational opportunities is fair and universal, making sure that government policy making, the rules for setting regulations are sort of transparent and open and available to all. And so in countries that have more inclusive economic institutions, we have tended to see markets produce better social outcomes overall. All right, so that's the big picture on markets. So far. These markets have all been static, right? Like, we've been thinking about markets as allocating goods and services, solving Kayak's information problem.

Speaker 1 • 23:32
But we've got this weird tension operating in the background of, you know, sort of. These are markets where firms aren't making any money and competition is really intense. All right, I'm going to talk about that idea in sort of the extreme case of it, which is financial markets. We often think of financial markets as being quite competitive and efficient. We'll talk about the extreme case of efficiency in a static market, and then we'll move on to talk a little bit about dynamics. Okay, so an idea that you'll come across in your finance classes about market efficiencies is that in efficient markets, there can't be any opportunities for what's called arbitrage. So how many of you have heard the term arbitrage, are thinking that you've engaged in arbitrage at some point or another? How many of you have bought, sold used goods? Yeah, I see a bunch of hands.

Speaker 1 • 24:38
In what kinds of settings? What kind of buying and selling or used goods you guys do over here? Clothes. Clothes and shoes. So some of you are like, how many do you use Sneakers? How many of you use ebay? A few. So you're arguably, you're engaging in arbitrage. One example of arbitrage is it should be the case in an efficient market that I can buy a piece of clothing or a sneaker and then take it to a different market. And sell it at a higher price. This makes no sense. My daughter is really into this stuff. She goes to what's the place on Harab in Brookline, Buffalo Exchange or something like that. She loves the idea that she can go thrift for T shirts or sweatshirts or whatever, pants. And then if she finds a good deal somewhere, she gets it for cheap because someone's just getting rid of it. She can take it to Buffalo Exchange and sell it at a higher price.

Speaker 1 • 25:36
When she succeeds at doing that, that's arbitrage. And in some ways, it's no different than the currency arbitrage that some of you think is going to be like your ticket to fabulous wealth because you're going to be a currency trader. In currency market, there are occasionally small arbitrage opportunities where I can buy dollars in euros at some exchange rate, then I can sell my euros to get yen at some other exchange rate. And because of the differences in the exchange rate, I can take my yen and buy dollars and make a profit. It's like a wealth creation opportunity. If the exchange rates are such that dollars are cheap in euro and euro are cheap in yen, but dollars are expensive in yen, then there's this like opportunity to just do some buying and selling and make a ton of money. Okay? That's called arbitrage. So arbitrage is just buying and selling the same asset at different prices and making a profit on it.

Speaker 1 • 26:38
Okay? Now that type of arbitrage, like sort of buying you clothing or currencies, it reflects some difference in the prices. Like the price of the vintage clothing has to be low in one place and higher another. Currency arbitrage, the exchange rates have to have a pattern that allows you to make money. There's also what's called information arbitrage. It might be that you have some information about what prices are going to be in the future that others don't have. So information arbitrage is the idea that you can buy an asset today cheap and sell it tomorrow expensive, because you know what's going to happen, right? In fact, we have rules against public company CEO's doing this. You know, if you are the CEO of a drug company and you know that you're going to announce a clinical trial result tomorrow that's going to increase your stock price by twenty percent.

Speaker 1 • 27:27
You can't just buy a bunch of your stock, announce the result, and then sell your stock to others tomorrow. That would be insider training. But insider training is the same as information arbitration. Okay? So arbitrage is this central idea about the way Financial markets should work. And the argument is that inefficient markets, when you get to the hypothetical ideal, when markets are really using all of that information, well, there should be no chance for arbitrage. Sometimes this is put as like, you know, an economist will tell you it's impossible that you found a dollar ten bill on the sidewalk, because if there were a ten dollars bill on the sidewalk, someone would have already picked it up. That's kind of a stupid argument. No, right. Like, of course there are ten dollars bills on the sidewalk. All of you have probably had that moment when you looked down and saw a buck or a ten or twenty lying around, or you found it somewhere in the real world.

Speaker 1 • 28:20
This happens. The idea, though, is that in markets that are very efficient, when there's lots of buyers and sellers, there should be very few of these opportunities in the limit. As you get to the hypothetical ideal, as you get to the most efficient kind of market, all of these opportunities should kind of disappear. Why? Because people are doing, you know, people are already taking advantage of them. Okay, so it's a little bit of a paradox. The idea is that people taking advantage of these opportunities means that there are no such such opportunities. But that's what kind of the no arbitrage argument did. In a world of no arbitrage, we have what's called efficient markets. Or you get the efficient market hypothesis, which is that asset prices reflect all available information. Right. This should, should sound familiar. It's kind of what Hayek was saying, only supplied to these very efficient markets.

Speaker 1 • 29:14
Right. If you are the type who wants to trade stocks and bonds and mess around with traditions, derivatives or whatever, there's a big implication. You believe this efficient market hypothesis. It suggests you can't win. Okay? It's very hard to beat the market unless you know you've got some kind of inside or private information about what's going to happen to a particular asset through time. There's three forms of the efficient market hypothesis. The weak form is just that information that's out there in the past affects prices. Then there's a version that says asset prices reflect all possible public information. And then there's the strong form is that asset prices reflect all information, both public and private. But the general point is that if markets are efficient, it's super hard to beat the market. And there's a lot of evidence that this is true, but it relies on sort of no arbitrage.

Speaker 1 • 30:10
And we know that sort of little arbitrage opportunities pop up. The question is sort of how fast do markets get rid of them. Okay, so to finish our sort of unit here on static markets, I want to offer one other perspective, and it's from another famous economist, John Maynard Keynes. He was sort of the intellectual adversary of Hayek. Keynes looked at these ideas, which are sort of the classical view of market efficiency, and he said, hey, hang on a second. He actually traded in financial markets. He regulated financial markets. And Keynes said, you know, fair enough. There's deficiencies. People are trying to get rid of arbitrage, but there's also something else going on in financial markets, which is people trying to respond to others. So he made this analogy. Keynes wrote, professional investment may be likened to newspaper competitions where competitors have to pick out the freest faces from one hundred photographs, the prize being awarded to the competitor whose choice most nearly corresponds to the average preferences of the competitors as a whole.

Speaker 1 • 31:18
So Keynes is kind of saying, you know, it's often the case that to make money in financial markets, I'm not trying to predict the truth, right? So if you think that the value of an asset, to go back to the last slide, the value of an asset reflects that NPV calculation that we taught you to do five weeks ago, then, you know, so that's Hayek's view. Keynes is saying, like, actually, I just need to be able to buy it and sell it at a higher price, which means I just gotta be able to think a little faster than the next guy. You're really just trying to predict where the market will go, not the truth, true value of the asset. Right. He says that's kind of like a competition where the winner just is trying to predict what everybody else is going to do. Right? And then he goes on to describe those kinds of competitions. He says, we've reached the third degree where we devote our intelligence to anticipating what average opinion expects the average opinion to be.

Speaker 1 • 32:13
So he's saying, actually, there's a lot of psychology and guessing about other people involved in market activity in financial markets, which might undermine a little bit this efficient markets hypothesis. Okay, so to give you a sense of, you know, the implications of that idea or how it works, I want to do something that would be a little fun, while at the same time, we do the check in. So the fun part is going to be, I want to play a Keynesian view contest game. So here's the rules of the game. Think about this. You're going to choose a number between one and one hundred, and the winner is the person whose guess is the closest to two thirds of the average of everyone else's Guess, and if there's a tie, I'll break the tie at random. So think about what number you would choose between one and one hundred so that you get your guests as close as possible to two thirds of the average of what everyone else in the room picks.

Speaker 1 • 33:18
Okay. While you do the attendance and check in, I'm going to go around the room and collect a couple guesses from people, and then we'll talk about the beauty contest. It. All right, I know. I know you know. Are you guys thinking about this? Can I ask you guys to stand up? Nico, Sandra, Tola, Braden, Brianna, and Gianla, just stand up for a second so I can, like, see you, and I want to hear, so, Nico. Where's Nico? Nico, you guessed fifty three. How come? Like, what were you thinking? Just random. Well, no, my first guess was, like, seventy seven. Okay, so first you started. You wanted to think seventy seven, but you dropped it because. Because two thirds seventy seven seems a little high if others go down. Okay. Sandra, what were you thinking? Fifty. Fifty, because it's in the middle. Okay. And Tola. Sixty six. Sixty six is kind of a fifty and sixty six are focal numbers.

Speaker 1 • 36:07
Sixty six is two thirds of a one hundred fifty is sort of like right in the middle. How about br. My high school number? Fifty five. Your high school number. Fair enough. Brianna, you just picked a random number in Gianla. I just said fifty seven. It was like, I don't know. I just chose a random kind of close to the middle, but not so close. Okay, so two. So three hundred and sixteen. Who has a calculator? What's three hundred and sixteen divided by six? Fifty two or something like that? So I think. I think our winner was Braden. So the lucky number from his high school jersey. Do you guys. What do you think now that you've had a little time to ponder the game? Where does this game go? Like, imagine we were in a really efficient market. The unique Nash equilibrium. If you analyze this game and you spend a bunch of time thinking about it, is one. In a perfectly rational world where everyone is making the best guess in response to everyone else making the best guess, everyone should guess one, and then I should just be picking a winner at random.

Speaker 1 • 37:26
Why is that? Start by imagining a world where everyone guesses one hundred. What's the best response to everyone else betting one hundred sixty six? If everyone else gets one hundred, I should try to get close to two thirds of one hundred, which would be about sixty six. But what if everybody bets sixty six? Then what's the best response to that? I should bet forty four. What? If everybody else bet forty four, I should bet thirty. Something, right? Like two thirds of forty four. That. That logic just goes down, down, down, down, down until everybody's betting one. Okay, okay. So that's the outcome of the Keynesian beauty contest. Why did I, you know, what's the point of this? Is this a model, a realistic model of a financial market? Of course not. This is not. The point is. Keynes's insight is an interesting insight, right? Like in a game or in a setting where we are all trying to think about what everybody else is going to do.

Speaker 1 • 38:23
If I'm responding to what other people are doing, it can lead us to some weird places here. It got everybody down to one. Because what matters in this game. Good to see you. Is my ability to guess what everyone else is going to do and not some underlying objective reality. It takes us very far from those efficient markets. Okay? In the real world, financial markets are this really fascinating blend of this kind of activity, right? Like trying to guess what everyone else is going to do, right? Which can lead to phenomenon like bubbles, which we all know exists, right? Like there are period, long periods of time when it seems like assets are very overvalued and everybody is thinking, well, I don't want to be the seller because other people are going to buy it and the price is going to go up. I'm spending a lot of time thinking about what everybody else is going to do.

Speaker 1 • 39:27
At the same time, there's a ton of evidence for these efficient markets, right? It's very hard for anyone to beat the market. Individual investors struggle mightily to sort of to beat what the rest of the market is doing, which suggests that, like, markets get asset prices approximately. Right? You know, sort of. These kinds of currency arbitrage opportunities are extremely rare and hard to find. Okay? So if you are a finance type and you want to go on and be a trader or work in financial markets, hopefully this gets you sort of started in thinking about. About how markets are both incredibly efficient and also somewhat psychologically driven and hard to predict. Okay, now let's put firms back in the picture, moving away sort of from perfectly efficient markets and finance. Okay? We're talking about market power and competition. Firms are always looking to make a profit.

Speaker 1 • 40:19
Their ability to make a profit depends on whether they have what's called market power. Market power is the ability to raise. Raise your prices profitably. When can a firm raise prices profitably? Firms can raise prices when they face a steeper demand curve instead of a flatter one. Why is That a steeper demand curve means when I raise my price, I lose fewer customers. Right? And you know this, which you're not responsible for, don't worry. This is just saying, look, if I change my price and the percentage change in price is bigger than the percentage change in quantity, if I gain more percentage price than I lose percentage demand, then revenue goes up. That means I can raise price profitably. So firms are always looking in markets. Firms, when operating in markets, are trying to get to more vertical demand curves. The two extremes here.

Speaker 1 • 41:18
Although we think demand always slows down when it's perfectly flat, that is a perfectly efficient market. When the firm faces a demand curve such that any little increase in price leads all the customers to go away. That's the world of efficient markets. The world of monopoly or, you know, sort of is one where the demand curve is vertical. I can raise the price as high as I want and I don't lose any customers. Okay? So maybe a life saving drug is one for which demand would be very steep. Why? Because there's no alternatives. A retail gas where I can go across the street to pay somewhat lower price, they may have a very flat demand curve. They may have very little market power. Where does market power come from? Comes from ability to substitute. Goes back to what we discussed earlier this semester about the antitrust markets. Buyers can substitute outside the market, right?

Speaker 1 • 42:11
Like maybe if you're in the market for a trip from Boston to San Francisco, you could substitute from a flight to a bus or a train. These are pretty bad options unless you have a ton of time. And so we think demand is pretty inelastic. You can also substitute to products inside the market where there's competition, okay? Competition depends on how much the product is differentiated and the costs of entering and expanding for firms in the market. So all this is to say, you know, sort of firms in the real world, you know, markets are rarely here. This is what we spent the first part of lecture talking about. These kind of hypothetical markets that give us Pareto efficiency and you know, perfect competition, we said, this is terrible for business over here. This is great for business, except maybe terrible, terrible for society, okay? And so this is this tension that we want to try and resolve a little bit.

Speaker 1 • 43:08
It's like, how is it that what's good for firms is not good for society and what's bad for firms is great for society? And in the reality, we're kind of in the middle somewhere, you know, again, like what firms want, like favoring markets and competition, what policymakers try to do to get the world over here is not favoring business and profits. Okay? The answer to this tension or the way in which the puzzle is resolved is through making competition dynamic. It turns out that firms compete not just through prices, but also through innovation. Okay, so the question of like, what can a firm do to gain market power? It's kind of of a fundamental strategy question. One option. One option is to try and get away from competition by just like buying all my rivals, you know, consolidating supply, sort of taking away the options of substitutes. If there are no substitutes, because we own all the, you know, all the competitors, we think that that's kind of bad, right?

Speaker 1 • 44:14
It leads to higher prices, less output, less product variety. These are the kinds of things you saw back in the Standard Oil before the antitrust laws were passed. Doesn't mean every acquisition, every deal is bad. You need to look at them one at a time. But does merger to monopoly or anti competitive merger still happen? Absolutely. Right. Like actually the FTC brought this case against Meta related to its purchases of Instagram and WhatsApp. And you, you can read these emails from Mark Zuckerberg that the FTC published where Zuckerberg at the time was like, yeah, it's going to be a lot better to buy WhatsApp in Instagram than to compete with them. Just say it, you know, it's not a good look for them. So, yeah, firms definitely think this way. Okay. Tom Woolman, who's a professor we just hired, wrote this paper with a great title, how to Get Away with Merger, where he talks about this kind of conduct.

Speaker 1 • 45:09
So that's option one for firms to get away from competition, and we think it's bad. Option two is to innovate. Firms can do something new. They can invent a new production method that lowers their costs. They can invent a new product for which there is demand putting new substitutes into the market. Okay, who is that kind of innovation could have bad for? Well, we think it's good for society. Right. Innovation often has the opposite of these effects. Needs to lower prices, more competition, more output. Who innovation can be bad for are incumbent firms who find the way that they've been doing business. Right. So we had revolution, for instance, in Edgerton, where, you know, streaming came in. Firms that were, you know, sort of selling dvd's, you know, lost out, let society be right? And so the message that, you know, sort of, I hope you get from the second part, second discussion section this week as we kind of go forward in class, is that what we would like to do in capitalist Economies is encourage firms to compete in this way.

Speaker 1 • 46:27
We need rules of the road and we'll talk more about this next week. To take firms profit seeking incentives and channel them away from this, right away from reduction of competition through reducing consumer options and choice, higher prices and so forth. Right? Static things that are bad in a static sense and get firms to try and escape from competition by doing things that are good. You know, dynamic sense. All right, so that brings us to this competition, this question of does competition promote innovation or discourage innovation? Okay, the answer to that question is yes. Competition promotes innovation and competition discourages innovation. So that makes it a little soft. Let me explain, okay? When firms are in a competitive market, they have this incentive to innovate, to escape from competition, right? Businesses are always thinking, what can I do that's new?

Speaker 1 • 47:23
How can I take new technologies, new consumer segments, changes and take advantage of them to make a profit? Okay, but then they have to protect that profit. They have to prevent someone else from coming in right away. Imitating okay, so that's what's called the appropriability problem. And there are many ways that firms can capture profits from innovation. They can get fast, get large faster than other companies. They can keep things secret. They can take advantage of intellectual property, they can take advantage of consumer inertia. Many of us just are more willing to buy from a brand that we know than a brand that we don't. So all of these things help companies that innovate protect their profits. But if competition is so strong and innovate, imitation happens so fast that the profits are just dissipated or disappear really quickly, that can undermine the incentive to innovate in the first place.

Speaker 1 • 48:17
So the leading example of this is drugs and pharma. In pharmaceuticals, it's very expensive to develop a new drug and push it through clinical trials. If we let generic pharmaceutical companies come in, it's very easy to reverse engineer a drug. So if we let a competitor introvert quickly after the first mover has spent all this money and compete, but sort of, it will drive the profits of the original innovator down such that they can't even really cover the costs of those investments. So what do we do? We give pharmaceutical companies a patent. We say you're protected for a while from an imitation. You get a property, right, for a limited period of time to be kind of a monopolist on your drug so that they can at least cover the costs of investing in innovation in the first place. So the point is that competition is good to get us moving, but it can be Bad if it's too strong after an innovation has happened, right?

Speaker 1 • 49:18
And the trick to making market based incentives for innovation work is to kind of get us to a sweet spot, right? So the first economist to ask all these questions is this guy Schumpeter. Schumpeter sort of believes, he sort of wrote Entrepreneurs are Great. He wrote another book that said big firms are great. The modern Schumpertarian perspective is that is that competition can promote innovation, right? And innovation leads to market power. This is kind of the dynamics of escaping from competition. This is moving away from efficiency in the perfect markets, the classical market sense. But then when firms have profit, that causes others to try and imitate them and enter their markets, which leads to more competition. This is taking us towards market efficiency in a static sense. In a modern economy like in the United States, we're trying to survive, keep this virtuous cycle going.

Speaker 1 • 50:19
Competition promotes innovation, creates rents, rents get dissipated through entry, more competition, right? So the way modern economics thinks about competition, especially in innovation, is that we don't want too little competition because then firms don't have any sort of kick in the ass to get going, you know, like we need them, we don't want monopolists this time. We need to push them to innovate. But we can't let innovation where competition get too far or else you lose this incentive in the first place. So we have these two policies that we use to try to keep us in the sweet spot. Antitrust to promote more competition, and intellectual property. And if we get this right, then in the economy we have this division of labor between little firms that are great at disruptive types of innovation. They come in and they do this stuff, you know, they get us like this.

Speaker 1 • 51:13
Those firms become big, right? And the large established firms are good at sort of like taking advantage of new innovations, but eventually they get disrupted. Okay? The Nobel Prize in Economics last year was awarded to a bunch of people who kind of helped lay out this view of competition through innovation. Okay, so to wrap up, hopefully in the first part of the lecture, we spok we focused on the classical view of static markets and we unpacked some of the benefits. The static markets, right, they're good at providing information and allocating goods and services that are efficient, but only under strong.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Class Discussion on Positionality, Gender, and Representation in Anthropology
Mar 23, 2026, 11:34 AM • 25 mins

SUMMARY KEYWORDS
positionality, anthropology, gender, representation, field notes, midterm reflections, The Hunger Games, anatomical imagery, patriarchy, AI in society, immigrant experience, feedback, student learning, cultural artifacts

SPEAKERS
Speaker 1, Speaker 2, Speaker 3, Speaker 4, Speaker 5, Speaker 6

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Speaker 1 • 00:00
But you have to use the field notes as kind of like a background to the. Like the center is the interview, but the field note is the background for the interview. So I can aim to understand what is the situation in which the interview is contextualized. So what time is it in the day? What is the people like? Is it busy in the place or is it very calm? So try to use it as a kind of a background to the interview, which is the standard. But still, if I like also try to incorporate things that I told you in the previous assignment. So I think that probably almost everybody. It's not everybody. I told you to do more positionality, to think more about your own specific individual person. So what's your gender? We're going to talk about gender today. What's your gender? What's your ethnicity? What's your. Are you a student? You're not a student. So obviously all this kind of stuff affects the way that you're experiencing situation.

Speaker 1 • 00:51
So try to address it as well in the reflection. Like after you're analyzing the interview, try to think about like how this can connect. And each of you got different feedback. So also try to incorporate it in the assignment. So I want to move on because I want to do different stuff today. But also if you have more questions, individual questions that you have on your specific case, please email me or talk to me after class to. I'm going to stay here for a few minutes. I also want to do a quick round of you. Each of you, I want you to try to answer one of those questions. So I'm suggesting four questions and each of you can choose which one you want answer. But I want to hear all of you. So it's just a midterm. I think it's a nice time to do refreshment. So the first option is to say something about the midterm. Maybe something that you understood during the midterm that you didn't understand good enough and you want to work on something that you understood that you actually really understood and you didn't know that you understood.

Speaker 1 • 01:55
I don't know, something that reflects about your experience on the midterm. Another option, something that you took from the first assignment, from the feedback that I gave you or from the experience and that you think that you want to improve. Implementing the second assignment, third option is a question that you still have about anthropology, something that you feel that you still not really answered throughout the semester, or just something that spikes your curiosity on anthropology or about doing anthropology, about doing ethnographic research. If it's something if there is something that you still think about. And the fourth option is if you want to be. If one day you have to be an anthropologist. If something that we already talked about kind of made you, made you understand. What kind of research do you imagine doing, what kind of research you're not imagining doing?

Speaker 1 • 02:45
What topics would you find more interesting or less interesting and why. So we're going to do. I'm going to give you like a minute to just think about it from your like each person on their own. And then I want to do like a round and I want to hear everybody. I know that it might be that little bit like. But you can choose which one maybe is the easiest for you to. To say. And it can be in one two sentences. You don't have to go with the full speech. I'm going to do it by order.

Speaker 2 • 03:16
I was just going to ask if the midterm notes got released. The. What was the midterm grades?

Speaker 1 • 03:21
Oh no, you didn't get it yet. You're going to get it on Friday. The first question I was wondering maybe the parents were learning through the midterm or taking the midterm. Maybe somebody has some reflections on it or some conclusions. I'm going to give you like thirty seconds for a second to process to see what you want to say. Okay, thirty seconds. Done. Who want to start?

Speaker 3 • 04:04
I think I should pay more attention

Speaker 1 • 04:07
to some, to memorize some satellites because there's very. So specific terms that we're using. Okay. Like I know this definition but I cannot like encounter that. I cannot view it. Okay, so that's a good conclusion for your next time for your, you know, your final. You know that that's something that you want to make sure that you're coming, right? Ready for? Yes. Great.

Speaker 3 • 04:45
I'll answer number four. If I ever become an anthropologist. I thought the, of the, the of the anthropologist article was very interesting. So I think I would like to study like higher societies specifically like the business world and like how that becomes so. In essentially like male dominated fields and like that type of attitude. So I think, I think like studying higher societies would be interesting. I was going to say something similar about the terms. That's something I struggled with on the midterm is like the exact term and especially like the anthropology that or in the colleges that it goes to. When I studied I focused more on like concepts and connecting them together rather than like actual terms

Speaker 1 • 05:42
similar to studying. I think thinking about how people in business have made powerful decisions. Pretty interesting. I think for I Like the stuff on the headhunters and stuff like that.

Speaker 4 • 05:57
I feel like it's be really cool

Speaker 1 • 05:59
to study things that you're like your first reaction is like oh my God, that's so disgusting. And like I think it's cool to like have to figure out how they justify. So in this, in this case what is appealing to you is not necessarily like studying of emotions but specifically studying like of things that are like practices. That seems like unreasonable.

Speaker 2 • 06:23
Like how the, how do you justify

Speaker 1 • 06:25
something that like to almost everyone else like

Speaker 4 • 06:31
yeah. Also answer for I'll probably study like guess civilizations that are just so like not attached like the rest of the world on like an own like island or something. I've seen like some videos online of different like like societies have been formed and like it would just be like very cool to like research that.

Speaker 1 • 06:52
Also go with number four. I would like to see how modern day corporations sort of use early anthropological principles and how it sort of dissipates power throughout the entire thing and how much does it actually dictate the actual functioning of these large multi conglomerates. For number two I think I need to give some more specific examples as opposed to just talking about what generally I see people doing specific examples that you saw like somebody talk about that, somebody did that.

Speaker 2 • 07:29
I think for number four I would like to study how you know, AI is getting into integrated in our society. Maybe in the future they will become individuals on their own instead of tools like we use right now on like, like how we would be treating that in a sense of law and logic and morals.

Speaker 1 • 07:50
If you want, by the way, if you want to send me, if you remember to send me an email I can send you a video of an anthropologist that I saw who is studying AI and she. It's like a two minute video that you talking about the implications like the cultural implications of AI which I believe in listening to.

Speaker 5 • 08:07
Score number two. I definitely want to look at how

Speaker 6 • 08:11
like like you said positioning like how

Speaker 5 • 08:14
who am I and what am I doing there and then how does that

Speaker 6 • 08:19
impact my field notes and my observations?

Speaker 3 • 08:25
I think for number one on the next test I want to dive like deeper into each of the concepts instead of doing like a broad and understanding of everything and dive into more specific. So for I think I need to work more on the readings each week. Sometimes I couldn't finish the readings every week so I just read them at last. So it's a little bit rush for me to study paper so I actually improved that.

Speaker 1 • 09:00
Okay, great.

Speaker 6 • 09:02
I think for number four I'D like to study, like, the immigrant experience. Like, I think whenever we read about, like, pressure, broken bodies, like, I found that to be like, very, very interesting. Especially like looking into visual experiences and how that event of like moving into a different country like now comes down that eventually impact their lives.

Speaker 1 • 09:26
You mentioned it's here in the US or like, you can visit another place

Speaker 6 • 09:32
so far, yeah, I'm thinking of it that way.

Speaker 3 • 09:38
For number two, I think in my positionality.

Speaker 6 • 09:47
For number one, I would say for studying for the midterm, like, I want to focus more on like in lecture sometimes we would talk about authors and like, things that have been written that weren't like assigned reading, but they would get mentioned. And there's one that was omnicherated Maxwell. So I want to like, make sure that I study and take the good notes on in class, like talking about like a writer that was not.

Speaker 3 • 10:16
For studying their own society. Like, do they know that there's like some spiritual knowledge from languages they speak? Like, I'm more like there are people who speak that language and there's people in the outside world that actually want to know about their culture, but they just want to know.

Speaker 1 • 10:34
I think it's also really interesting to look at how people are responding to their own representation.

Speaker 3 • 10:43
For number four, if I would ever become an anthropologist, I think I would study, like, religion. Because this week, like on Monday when we were talking about on the Walk to Air game, it was really interesting to me personally. I'm like an atheist, so I don't believe in God or anything, but it's kind of cool how people like believe.

Speaker 5 • 11:06
I think that more to.

Speaker 3 • 11:09
I want to focus more on just getting like individual encounters and stuff like that down. But I think that right now, like, actual conversations.

Speaker 1 • 11:23
Great. I also want to say, by the way, because a lot of you mentioned the, like the positionality in the. In the second one, something that I thought about as well, that also think about the position. I think that all of you, regardless if I told you about it in the first assignment or not, you should all think about your positionality when you're doing an interview. So obviously professionality really matters in a conversation. So gender matter, age matter, if you're talking to an old lady who thinks that you're like such a young person, it's different than if you're talking to somebody in your own age. Think about it. It doesn't have to mean that the questions should be changed based on that. You can still ask the same question, but in your reflection, think maybe about how the specific person that you're talking with, how this specific dialogue also affected by the positionality of both sides, not only of yours, but also the other person.

Speaker 1 • 12:12
Okay, so thank you very much. Actually, I really enjoyed listening to this round of reflection. So maybe I'm going to do it more. I don't know. Maybe with similar questions, maybe different questions. But for me, maybe you suffer, but I really. I really enjoy to actually hear a little bit more. Everybody. Okay, without further ado, we're gonna talk about the cultural artifacts of the day. So we have three people, right? So. I need to open the video. Okay. Okay. So I'm just gonna put the video and then I'm gonna go and say whatever you want.

Speaker 3 • 13:15
It.

Speaker 5 • 13:41
Two,

Speaker 3 • 13:48
Three.

Speaker 4 • 13:51
Shop.

Speaker 5 • 13:53
Shop.

Speaker 1 • 13:58
Ladies and gentlemen, may I present the

Speaker 5 • 14:01
winners of the seventy fourth annual Hunger Games.

Speaker 1 • 14:19
Is it like the final scene? I don't know what I. I'm such a ignorant.

Speaker 4 • 14:31
So for the first part about like second sexuality this week was the gender sexuality. So we tried finding a scene or captures that are object. So this scene kind of captured that. That really pops out, like their heterodormative romantic love. They can like, conquer all. And that they're willing to both commit suicide by eating those berries, which obviously you guys most likely didn't know. So they really kill themselves because they were forced to kill one another. Sorry, it's like. It just.

Speaker 1 • 15:02
No, no, I. I know that in general there is like a game that people have to kill each other, but that's what I know.

Speaker 4 • 15:06
So that's like the sexuality part. And then like our.

Speaker 1 • 15:09
Wait, so here they're like deciding to kill each other, like to kill themselves together.

Speaker 3 • 15:14
The.

Speaker 5 • 15:15
The thing is, there's two people from. There's like a bunch of different, like, places.

Speaker 3 • 15:20
Two people are chosen.

Speaker 5 • 15:21
It's a boy and a girl, which I think is also interested in. In that gender divide that they have made it so that there is like a boy and a girl from each place. So it's a clear, like, binary. And then they all basically have to kill each other for the entertainment of the capital and like the, like higher ups and stuff. And then whoever is the last standing wins. And they are both from the same place, but there's only supposed to be one person that wins and they're in love. So then they. Because they thought that they were going to be able to both win, and then they changed the rules on them. It's like a whole thing. But basically they're like, no, we're not going to give you a winner. We're Both going to die. And that's what this means.

Speaker 1 • 16:12
Okay everybody. I'm the only person in the room who haven't seen meaning.

Speaker 2 • 16:17
No,

Speaker 1 • 16:21
I understand the.

Speaker 4 • 16:23
And then there's also. I wish we could just present the whole movie, feel like it, capture the whole thing. I guess. I guess you could say that our object itself is like the movie cuz it also speaks to the gender where in the movie the main female character is out like protecting, killing, like survival instincts. And while like the male character here is like vulnerable and like her and like scared really just reverses the normal like the norm of genders. I feel like in regular society where the male man is usually out killing and doing everything is more vulnerable. So I really think that this is a great spin that the Hunger Games get. Also gives off as like we're reverse individuals.

Speaker 3 • 17:13
Theory that push towards nature emotion, even when they act in culture in cultural and political way. And then also Marlon Stratford, you can also observe that their genders only make sense in relation to one another in the audience rather than just their individual personalities. Their relationship as a couple becomes politically risky for me.

Speaker 5 • 17:47
Yeah. And kind of with that, I think that the, the whole storyline is basically about how Katniss doesn't actually really like him, but as a flake, as a political move, as a way to keep herself alive. She is engaging in this kind of like stereotypical like oh, I'm in love with you, blah blah, blah. Even though she like establishes a very independent, very like character compared to PETA, who's the guy. But then also I think just the, the clear separation that they have between genders is really important to that kind of like leading into like they. It wouldn't, it doesn't make sense unless they have each other to like balance off. But the descriptions and the way that they portray all the people, they make it so that even in something that is as like horrific as like killing, they're very much stuck in these gender norms and have to kind of use them to their advantage to survive.

Speaker 5 • 18:50
Because like, if you look at like the expectations of like what people think they should be doing for like the skills that they're good at, the men are usually like stronger for this and they like. I think PETA's whole thing is that he can like lift heavy things and like throw them and that's what everyone focuses on. But he is also like an artist and that's a big part of it. But they kind of don't look at that as much because it's not seen as. As important to the character, because he's American.

Speaker 1 • 19:23
Okay. I actually need to see now, like, do you know where it's available? Like Netflix. Netflix. Okay.

Speaker 3 • 19:40
Yeah.

Speaker 5 • 19:40
There's, like, a lot. The first one is the big one, and then they. And then they made a lot more.

Speaker 1 • 19:47
Okay. One is going to be enough, but thank you so much. It was really interesting and you actually made me want to see the movie. Is it like. It's going to be like a trashy watch. You made it sound so be. I'm like, I thought it's trash. It's.

Speaker 3 • 20:02
No, it's based on. It's based on a mode.

Speaker 5 • 20:04
It's like, like dystopian. Like young adult novel. And then I think a lot of. A lot of books then came after it and were poorly written, but, like, were kind of based on it. And so they kind of made the entire genre get worse.

Speaker 1 • 20:21
Oh.

Speaker 5 • 20:21
But yeah, my favorite series. Yeah. The book itself is actually very well written. It's very interesting. It's very like, anti government, anti authority.

Speaker 3 • 20:28
There's a new one coming out.

Speaker 1 • 20:30
Yeah. Think it's like there is, like, the Squid Game, which is supposed to be something similar or not at all. In some. In my mind, it's like the same category, but I don't know if it's the same.

Speaker 5 • 20:40
They're both dystopian, but I think they're.

Speaker 1 • 20:42
The Squid Game is more dark. Right. And it's less romantic, I think. Like, I feel like always, like, in my mind, this was always, like, in the middle between, like, Squid Game and like, Twilight Collab. That's my hype. I don't know. But only based on my imagination. No evidence.

Speaker 2 • 20:59
The only good thing about this is that this one's fictional. I did not watch, but I actually know the, you know, plot. This one is fictional. Squid Game is actually based on real events.

Speaker 1 • 21:11
Oh, really? Okay. You didn't watch that?

Speaker 2 • 21:14
Yeah, sadly.

Speaker 1 • 21:18
Okay, thank you. So gender and sex. Sexuality. Let's start. How was that? Oh, okay. So I'm gonna have time for the last activity that I want. Okay. So I just googled the human body and this is what I found. What? Based on the things that we discussed previous week. I know it's not last week. It's actually like three weeks ago or something. It's a little bit in the past, but try to. To remember what some of the things that we talked about. What can we see in this image? Just the thing that I saw when I grew relative to human. But what do you find?

Speaker 5 • 22:00
People think,

Speaker 1 • 22:05
Yes, but wait a second. Somebody. Everybody spoke Today, because I didn't. Somebody who didn't present today. It's anatomical, but that's not surprising, right? Or it is, maybe. Actually, maybe it's surprising that human body can be also not anatomical. Right. Like, it can be also, like, images of body and theological anatomy. Yeah. Okay. Yes. Right. So all the images. Admiration. Want to say the same. Yeah. So all the images here are actually made. Right. Like, there is no. So it's not that I couldn't find. I could find. I think it was like, the. The next floor had some. They had, like, two females or something. But the first floor, like, most of the images that I found. And I think that maybe it's even changing. I don't know if it's getting more politically polite. And I think that when I was a child, I've never seen, like, I feel like even more of the images were male bodies.

Speaker 1 • 23:12
And why does it matter? If it matters, like, why should we care? Okay. If I'm Googling the human body and all the bodies that I'm seeing, all the anatomy sketches are sketches of a male, why can it be with any kind of significance? Or what can we say? Do we have a term filling the blank? Do we have a term that might explain this position?

Speaker 6 • 23:36
Yes, it kind of, like, reinforces, like, the patriarchy of, like, the men are in, like, the more, like, dominant position in society. And it's like, this happens in, like, a lot of ways where, like, it's kind of like, oh, like, the male version is like, the default. Like, the men version goes first. So it's like, I don't know, kind of just reinforces, like, the power structure.

Speaker 1 • 24:00
Right. So the default is automatically the main, by the way, just so you know, in Hebrew, for example, like, if I want to say the human body, I'm actually saying a man's body. Like, I cannot say you. Like, saying human is actually saying a man. Like, there is no way to say human for, like, without being already positioned into gender. Like males and position.

Speaker 3 • 24:25
You can do that in English, too.

Speaker 5 • 24:27
Like. Like mankind.

Speaker 1 • 24:28
Oh, right, like mankind. Exactly. Yeah. So in Hebrew, human. Like, but you. You have human, and you have man. You can choose if you want to. Like, you cannot say the humankind. Or can you. Can you say humankind?

Speaker 5 • 24:41
But I feel like. I feel like that's a thing that people are doing to be more politically correct.

Speaker 1 • 24:45
Okay, interesting. Yeah. So in Hebrew, we don't even have a choice because there is no neutral. Human is kind of a neutral word. But we don't have a neutral word because it's a very gendered language. I think there was more hands. Somebody else wanted to add something. Yes.

Speaker 2 • 25:02
I would like to say that maybe throughout history, maybe the body of a woman was seen more vulgar or maybe more sacred than a man's. So that's why as time progressed and science started being taught at schools to children, rather than displaying a woman's body, they decided to display men's bodies in classrooms. However, that is changing in our time right now.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Exploring Race, Identity, and Social Constructs in Contemporary Society
Mar 23, 2026, 11:00 AM • 45 mins

SUMMARY KEYWORDS
race, social construct, Justin Garcia, whiteness, sports, economic mobility, genetics, hypo-descent, Brazil, United States, midterm feedback, reading strategies, Franz Boas, racial common sense, orthodoxy

SPEAKERS
Speaker 1, Speaker 2, Speaker 3, Speaker 4, Speaker 5, Speaker 6

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Speaker 1 • 00:02
And I always find I always find something wrong you can put up with my it's just way too long

Speaker 2 • 00:13
I'm

Speaker 1 • 00:13
so gifted to find what I don't like the most so I think you survive Douchebags. That needs Jesus. Been through a lot of things Tell me if you know someone that needs Keep. Sitting by myself I'm just thinking about all I've been through I wish I was dreaming man, it's hard to be an angel when you surrounded by demons I watch so many people leave I see them change by the season that's mama's seasoning God got you the devil's watching he just peeking in I know I made a promise that I never let the reaper in but lately I've been losing all my deepest friends and lately I've been swimming on the deepest end it's this drugs it ain't no hugs, it ain't no love that you've been now so much you don't even know what's upstairs Suicidal thoughts got you wondering what's up there and why they ain't you do a party they say it's up there Too many feels, so much pot, so much pain, too many emotions and everything that you do good and just go unnoticed did they tell you that you could just stay focus?

Speaker 1 • 04:03
Mama, you was the life of the party I swear you brought life to the party. When you lost your life, you took the life about the party.

Speaker 3 • 04:20
Let's take a few minutes, say hi to people around us, and talk about this question. Is this song a Christian song? We think about the different questions we talk about on Friday, right? What is the message of the song? Some of your colleagues said the message of the song is important. Who is the singer? Right. Who is the audience? What was the intention of the singer potentially when he created the song? How is the singer viewed by other people? So take a few moments, say hi to the people around you and talk about whether or not these two songs would qualify as your theme song.

Speaker 4 • 05:02
I mean, the song clearly has a lot of Christian and imagery and like pointers to God, I guess. But I like, wouldn't say that it's exactly like a Christian song because, like, if it were, it would like, tell like the story of Christ, I guess. I don't know, Because it's like, tells you how like Christ, I guess, changed his life believing in something else. I mean. But in the end of the day, I mean, the writer is still Kanye, but Kanye does make like a lot of like, religious based songs. So it.

Speaker 3 • 06:28
Okay, let me just interview from you. What are your thoughts? Right. Thinking like social theorists. Are these songs Christian? Why or why not? What were your thoughts or your college? I think it depends on what is meant by Christianity. Christian, like Christian according to whom? Is it the use of Christian motifs?

Speaker 5 • 06:51
Is it according to the particular Christian church's orthodoxy?

Speaker 3 • 06:56
Super interesting question or super great, super interesting way of thinking about it. Is the singer. Are you saying specifically the singer considered Christian by other Christians? Absolutely. Is the singer participating in a kind of orthodoxy, a term that we also used on Friday? I think that it's accurate to say that some Christians would not consider Kanye west to be a good example of a Christian. Right? Some Christians would disavow Kanye West. That's interesting. Does Kanye west identify as a Christian? Yes. So this is also a very interesting moment where social theorists have to which is a pale is something that's potentially kind of thorny.

Speaker 1 • 07:42
Right.

Speaker 3 • 07:42
The creation of orthodoxy. The social theorist has to say, well, the song is Christian because the singer's Christian. The song also isn't Christian in the sense that other Christians disavow or disagree with Kanye West. I just see it as an example, maybe a very bad Christian. Let's look at one more example while we're waiting for this. It. Okay, can everyone open up? Or maybe every few people in a row open up the PDF for today's class. I just want to talk briefly with you about your feedback on the midterm and some changes that we're going to make. And hopefully we can finish the rest of class using the PowerPoint. I think everything is turned off. Okay. No, you go to slide six on the PDF of the PowerPoint for today's class. That's where we start discussing your midterm evaluation responses. Thank you all for participating. It was very helpful.

Speaker 3 • 09:38
You will hear more about feedback regarding sections and your sections this week. But I just wanted to show you some of your some of what your colleagues so if you look at slide seven, we see some of the favorite readings of the semester. We also see some of the least favorite readings of the semester. This is always very helpful to me. I do occasionally change the readings. It's also useful to see that maybe the reading that you really liked, some of your colleagues thought was not a great reading. Right. And so we actually have some of the readings that appear here on both sides. Of this chart. I also wanted to draw your attention to or acknowledge something that a number of comments are said, which is that some of the articles are very boring to read. And I wanted to affirm that and tell you, yes, some of the articles are very boring to read for me as well.

Speaker 3 • 10:39
I agree. But one of the skills that I'd like you to leave this class with is the ability to read a challenging article that's kind of boring and extract something useful from it and then move on. Right. Also not get bogged down in an article that is initially a little challenging and perhaps. Okay, so if you go to slide eight, I wanted to also address some helpful questions that some of you left on the evaluation. So the first one, what if you spend two hours reading something and you haven't finished? Right. Our two hour rule, which is also what we use to hone this skill of reading challenging articles that are kind of boring, but still managing to read them and extract some kind of information from them, that is totally okay. Right. You will develop a strategy. Often times people who are in law school will also say this. You kind of start at the beginning of the article before you read the body of the article, and so you can practice different approaches.

Speaker 3 • 11:41
But if you do find that you're approaching the two hour mark, jump to the end of the article. Right. And see where it ends up. Come to class the next day or that day and we'll talk about what was important. And I did want to also affirm that you will not be tested on arguments or concepts from articles that we do not address in class. However, when you're preparing for the final exam, please do go back to the readings. Look at the excerpts that we've talked about, look at the concepts, look at the ideas in the text themselves. Please don't rely only on the PowerPoint. Also, one of your colleagues said, my least favorite readings are the ones that weren't on the midterm exam, like ejaculate or something. Responsibly. Yes. This is not on the midterm exam. This will be on the final exam. So we stopped at week six. The final exam is cumulative, so any of these readings could be on the final exam.

Speaker 3 • 12:36
Okay. Slide nine. So this is our midterm exam fairness. Over eighty five percent of you thought that the midterm exam was fair. We are going to look at some of the questions together. So I'll look at some of the questions that had a kind of high rate of incorrect responses. I'll look at some of those with you in lecture. You'll also look at some of those in section so we can think about how to better prepare for the final exam. If you'd like to look through your entire exam, please come to my office. Hours. We can go through it together. You can also go to your TS office hours and look through your exams. Slide ten what you like best and least specific specifically about lecture. You will hear more again about section section so many of you liked the videos, the tiktoks, the revisiting of readings, right? Trying to make sense of some of these readings that are admittedly sometimes boring and opaque, right?

Speaker 3 • 13:34
But getting the necessary and useful information from it. Also, a number of you suggested that it was nice to talk to the people around you and to try to answer the questions that are asked in conversation in small groups before we talk about it together. A number of you also said that you didn't like reading the quotes on the projector on the PowerPoint, which I'll talk about again in a second. Slide eleven I did want to tell you if the slides go by too quickly or if there's a term that you do not know. Please do ask me if you don't know. I'm sure that many other people don't know and it's very helpful to me when you ask if you don't want to ask during lecture. You can also email me after class and I can clarify in the next class where you're so finally, slide twelve changes. Thank you for your suggestions. So we're going to keep looking at excerpts, doing the close reading, but I will not ask anyone to read out loud.

Speaker 3 • 14:38
Sometimes that works well, sometimes it doesn't. I will read them out loud, but then I'll ask you to talk about them in small groups and then I'll be interested to hear what you have to say, what your colleagues have to say. I will also put summarizing slides at the end of our PowerPoints, which one of your colleagues suggested, I thought was a really good idea. And you'll hear more and slightly section about final midterm review. Any questions? Okay. All right, so let's keep going. We would like to talk about Justin Garcia's piece today and his textbook chapter on race and ethnicity. We don't read a lot of textbook chapters in this class. We primarily read articles. But I think that this is one of the most interesting pieces that we read this semester and I am interested to hear what stuck out to you and what interested you. So Justin Garcia starts off, It's.

Speaker 3 • 17:02
Okay. Why don't you all take a moment to talk to people around you? Was there something that petition particularly struck you from Justin Garcia's article? An example, for example, his section on sports, his anecdotes about his own personal experience with Race, how he's often misidentified anything that particularly struck you or that you found useful. Have a minute of small group discussion. It. Sam. Here. Okay. That's okay. Thank you. Okay, so we're going to try to move very quickly through Justin Garcia. Justin Garcia is interested in this thing, right? He tells us early on called racial common sense. He talks about it in his own experience. He says he often walks through different parts of the United States. He's American, and he's misidentified. He's identified in some places as Italian. In other places, he says it's just broadly Hispanic.

Speaker 3 • 20:49
In other places Puerto Rican, in other places Mexican, and other places black or Mediterranean or Arab. And so he. This is a personal interest of his, right? This is often the case with anthropologists, that they're interested in things that are personally meaningful to them. Justin Garcia is very interested in race. He tells us at the very beginning of what we read for today, he's interested in race because it is something that has been confusing to him. His entire life has been a means by which he has been interpolated or called upon by other people. And so he tells us that racial common sense, it's again, this idea that we keep coming up against that many of our ways of thinking, right, are structured in ways that are invisible to us. And so he says, racial common sense is a deeply entrenched social belief that another person's racial or ethnic background is obvious and easily determined and can be used also to give us important information about someone.

Speaker 3 • 21:49
But as Garcia tells us very early on, right, from his own experience, reality is much more complex. And so Justin Garcia asks a number of questions he's interested in thinking with us about when race is, in fact, a useful category of analysis, how it is real or quote, unquote, scientific, and how it is not, and also how it is culturally inflected, how it varies across cultures and also how it varies across time. He uses specifically the United States as a laboratory to think about those questions. So Justin Garcia opens with a historicization of the quest to identify and separate people into racial groups. And it's worth just pausing for a moment to point out that many of these ideas came in the centuries and specifically in the decades before what we have been talking about in class, social evolutionism, the early anthropological efforts at salvage ethnography.

Speaker 3 • 23:01
We see Justin Garcia tells us a real kind of intellectual problem that those interested in the quote, unquote, science of race and encounter. They try to group people into racial groups, but they keep finding people that don't fit. Garcia tells us about Aboriginal Australians, for example, of dark complexions and red hair, who proved a particularly thorny group for so called scientists of race to classify. And so he tells us, which is kind of surprising, I think, at least today, thinking from the perspective of the place where we are currently studying, that there was a kind of major proliferation of racial categories. Some researchers said, actually we should have maybe sixty races. This will help us account for all of this human diversity. And so what Garcia is interested in pointing is too right, is also the lack of consensus, the inability of researchers in the eighteenth, nineteenth and twentieth centuries to settle on a satisfactory solution for this question.

Speaker 3 • 24:21
And we've talked about this before, right? We've talked about, in relationship to social evolutionism, the idea that existed in the nineteenth century, the turn of the twentieth century, that people's bodies gave us very important information about them, that groups, that racial groups were solid, stable groups that had identifiable boundaries, and that people within particular groups were better fit for some things than others. This again, right, is the idea of biological determinism. This is something that Franz Boas, if you remember all the way at the very beginning of the semester, Franz Boas, the father of American anthropology, did this study where he looked at the skulls at a time when skull size was imagined to be tied to intelligence and moral behavior, something that scientists afterwards abandoned. But Franz Boas looked at the skull sizes of the children, immigrants from Southern and Eastern Europe who had grown up in the United States, and he looked at children living in Southern and Eastern Europe, and he determined that children who had moved to the United States actually had larger skulls.

Speaker 3 • 25:41
This doesn't actually seem very surprising to us now, but at the time, it disrupted the idea that racial groups or ethnic groups were coherent, stable holes that were unchangeable. And so Boaz pointed to the fact that, for example, increased access to nutrition, for instance, to nutritional foods, could change the skull sizes of children. And so in this way, right, he disrupted this idea that racial groups or stable holes, that people's bodies looked the same within these groups, and that these bodies gave us information about what they would be good at and also what they would be bad at. Okay? And so one of the things that Garcia wants to point out to us, and perhaps the most important message of his chapter, is something that becomes clear even through probably many contemporary experiences with racial categories, including Garcia's own experiences, which is that race is a social construct.

Speaker 3 • 27:05
And he's interested again in showing us how race is a social construct by pointing to how it varies across time. In the United States. And what does he tell us? We normally have you talk to your colleagues right now, but we're just going to move through because we're a little bit late. He tells us first of all that whiteness has changed over time in the United States. We're going to talk about this more on Wednesday. Wednesday we're going to talk a lot about whiteness. He tells us that many people who are perceived of as white today were not perceived of as white even one hundred years ago or less. He also is very interested in the relationship between racial and ethnic groups as they are described as existing by people in the world and these groups participation in sports. And so he tells us that we see throughout the twentieth century shifts in what racial groups participate most in professional sports.

Speaker 3 • 28:19
And we also see, he tells us, a very interesting repeated perception that the group that is most successful, the racial ethnic group that is most successful in a particular sport, if they are not white, are understood as being, quote unquote, naturally gifted. But he shows us that these non white players, natural giftedness, considered non white at the time. Some of these groups now are considered white, like Italian Americans, Jewish Americans, Irish Americans. So he tells us that, for example, these groups have changed across time. Early twentieth century basketball and boxing were dominated by Italian, Irish and Jewish men. And there was often an explanation given that their culture made them quite good at this, or their bodies were predisposed to be very good at the this. By the nineteen nineties, he points out, there's a different question that's being asked, which is why are so many black people good at sports?

Speaker 3 • 29:31
Why are so many black Americans very, very good at basketball? Very, very good. By nineteen ninety two, approximately ninety percent of NBA players were African Americans. And the league's demographics once again fueled the same kind of ideas. Rumors that African Americans were, quote, naturally gifted in basketball. However, he says this changed again within ten short years. Foreign born players, largely from eastern European nations, accounted for nearly twenty percent of the starting lineups of NBA teams, Whereas previously they had been almost completely absent. And so we see shifts, right, that tell us again about the instability of these categories. What else might this suggest to us?

Speaker 6 • 30:28
Yeah, I think maybe it should be highlighted economic status. I know that there's a large change in Eastern Europe like in the nineteen nineties. So in this place there are many people go from rich to poor and they have to go to America for their own. Also for the Irish and Italian people. So they their only way is to actually sport as a career is a very costly thing for People. So

Speaker 3 • 31:11
absolutely, yeah, excellent points. Your colleague is pointing to the fact that sports can be a means, right, for economic advancement, for economic self improvement. And so we have groups, early twentieth century considered to be not properly white or in fact inferior whites, using particular sports, often sports that were played outside in alleyways, using those particular sports as a means for economic or self advancement. And then we have a shift to other groups, right. Who are not naturally gifted any more than these particular groups. Right. That doesn't make sense. But are using sports as a means for self advancement. Garcia also has a very interesting description of how race is viewed in other parts of the world. And I want to take a moment just to think with you about his comparison of Brazil and the United States. He has a very interesting write up on Japan.

Speaker 3 • 32:23
We're just going to talk specifically about Brazil today. A very interesting comparison. So Garcia says, useful to compare Brazil and the United States, two societies in which European colonial powers brought people from West Africa, enslaved them on plantations. You have a very similar early pattern, demographic pattern. He says, however, the understanding of race in Brazil is in many ways radically different. He says the term used in Brazil, tipos, rather than describing what is believed to be a person's biological or genetic ancestry, which is often how race is described in the contemporary United States, tipos describe slight but noticeable differences in physical appearance. There are a lot of them, he says some sociologists and anthropologists say that there are one hundred and twenty five tipos in Brazil. He also says family members can belong to different tipos, to different racial groups.

Speaker 3 • 33:28
He says a single person in their life can shift among racial groups. They can get a sunburn, they can shift among racial groups. This is radically different. Right. In the contemporary United States, the borders between racial groups are actually very strictly patrolled or surveilled. People who try to claim membership in a racial group that they do not properly belong to suffer serious social stigma. The United States, Garcia tells us, has a racial system that is historically organized around black and white as kind of distinct standard archetypal groups, racial groups. And he says there was an early colonial prohibition on intermarriage that potentially inflected the enduring idea that these groups are radically different polar opposites and should remain so. And we have a very interesting also example of a peculiarity of the United States.

Speaker 3 • 34:40
Why is former President Barack Obama America's first black president? What is the race of his father? Where's his father from? Yeah, Ken, Yeah, absolutely. Where was his mother from? The United States? Kansas. What was her race? She's. She was White. Absolutely. She was also an anthropologist, by the way. Interesting. Barack Obama is half white, but he is considered to be our first black president. And this tells us something about how Americans think about race, about how our society is structured, that we are a society of hypo descent in which a person of mixed racial heritage is automatically categorized as a member of the less or least, if there are multiple, if there are more than two privileged group. So therefore we don't talk about Barack Obama as the first half white, half black president. We talk about him as the first black president.

Speaker 3 • 35:49
Garcia also tells us he's in conversation with physical anthropologists. Some of you are taking one hundred and two right now. Garcia also tells us it's really interesting that Homo sapiens are very, very focused on so called genetic differences since that we are one of the most genetically similar of all species because we are a relatively recent species. And he also tells us that genetic variation does not map onto this thing called race. This is from a website that's run by the American Anthropological Association. You're welcome to take a look at it if you're interested. But basically the point of this particular study, the point, one of the main arguments of this exhibit, which has now been preserved as a website, is that our categories of race have little relation to genetics, that there's more genetic variation among people living on the same continent, often assumed to be members of the same race.

Speaker 3 • 37:00
And for example, the racial categories that are used as the contemporary United States and many medical studies that are run in Europe or North America, there's more genetic variation among people living on the same continent than among two people randomly selected from different continents. So we're going to watch a video. What does genetic variation map onto? What does give us information about people's bodies? Justin Garcia tells us this. I wanted to show you an example of how we see this in contemporary conversations. This is a clip from Good Morning America. It's a very the interview. You'll see the interviewer is very excited. He thinks that this is kind of a gotcha book. But I'd like you to pay attention specifically to the answer to this question.

Speaker 2 • 37:56
Sports Gene Inside the Science of Extraordinary Athletic Performance. I talked to the author David Epstein about a headline grabbing book that he's written to tackle some of the most controversial, really taboo topics in sports today, including whether nature or nurture makes the best athlete and whether some ethnic groups are better suited to succeed at athletics.

Speaker 5 • 38:16
In Kenya, we're used to thinking of all Kenyans as being great runners, but really when I visit it's one tiny tribe that makes up ten to twelve percent of the population there, the Kalenjin tribe that produces the vast majority of the good runners. It's a Kalenjin phenomenon, not Kenyan. And one thing that they happen to have is their ancestry is at low latitude, hot and dry climate. They have extremely long limbs proportional to their body size. And that's an evolutionary adaptation for cooling.

Speaker 2 • 38:42
So what had been a taboo subject that certain ethnic groups are genetically predisposed to athletic superiority. Really it's more that there's an evolutionary fluke that there's something that allowed people to get by, that they can be applied athletically.

Speaker 5 • 38:57
Absolutely. And it means they're worse for some other things. So people with northern latitude ancestry, you and I, Europeans. Michael Phelps have longer torsos, which is like the long hull of a canoe. So that's better for swimming. He has extremely short legs. Michael Phelps is six foot four, has the same inseam as the guy who holds the world record in the mile, who's five foot nine. Those guys wear the same size pants.

Speaker 2 • 39:17
And I want to discuss something that a lot of parents watching at home are going to be interested in. The idea of the specialized athlete, the kid who's playing the club playing year round as opposed to maybe someone say of my vintage, somebody who played all sports seasonally. What did you find makes the best athlete?

Speaker 5 • 39:35
So there's some evidence that in certain sports, gymnastics, some evidence for golf, that early specialization helps in other sports, it looks like acquiring a range of experiences and skills through your teen years actually benefits athletes later on. You look at a guy like Steve Nash, right? One of the most skilled basketball players who ever lived, didn't get a basketball until he was thirteen years old, played soccer. So it looks like now the best thing to do is to sample, find the best fit for your unique genome and then specialize in mid teen years, kind of fifteen and sixteen. That's the pattern that most of the elites have.

Speaker 2 • 40:06
Figure out what your skill set is. Go find the sport that emphasizes it. It is a fascinating book. We could sit and spend hours on it.

Speaker 5 • 40:14
We shan't.

Speaker 2 • 40:14
But it is the sports gene. It's by David Epstein. Thank you so much.

Speaker 5 • 40:18
Thanks for having me.

Speaker 3 • 40:19
Okay, what is the argument of this book? It's addressing directly this question about the relationship between race and athletic ability. Yeah, Absolutely. Thank you. It is an argument about geographic origin is not about race, is about geographic origin. The geographic origin of one's ancestors does give us information about what people's bodies may be predisposed to do what illnesses they may be predisposed to have, also potentially what particular abilities they may be particularly likely to have as well. I wanted to also just introduce you to a very interesting open letter that is in the spirit of what Garcia is talking about, also in the spirit of this sports gene book. And that reminds us of Emily Martin's argument and the sperm and the egg. What is her argument in the sperm and the egg for the egg and the sperm?

Speaker 1 • 41:54
Yeah.

Speaker 3 • 42:04
Absolutely. Excellent. That how we think and talk about gender inflects how scientists describe specifically the process of fertilization. Right. The daring, intrepid sperm that's moving directly ahead towards the egg and the egg that is waiting patiently to be fertilized. And she tells us, even when there is contradictory information, scientists often do not change the narrative because her argument is it reflects deeply held and invisible beliefs about gender. Similar arguments have been made about race. Similar arguments have been made specifically by scientists writing an open letter to a Harvard geneticist who has written since the two thousand ten S quite a bit about race. And this open letter basically says, if you assume that a group is a race and you try to find information confirming that that group is a race, you can find it.

Speaker 3 • 43:08
You can treat the Red Sox fans as a race, Yankees fans as a race, and you could find statistically significant frequency, higher frequency of some illnesses than others. That doesn't mean this open letter says that those groups are racist. Kind of. Right. Provocative. Take, provocative comparison, but I think illustrates this idea that Emily Martin also has that often we bring potentially to our research ideas about what already exists, and we use that research to confirm those ideas in ways that often can be limiting. Okay, we have about two minutes left. If race doesn't actually give us very much information, why do we focus on it? What do anthropologists say? They say, well, we're highly visual creatures. The focus on skin color, however, is arbitrary. What else could we focus on? Justin Garcia talks about this a little bit. We could focus on other things like the thickness or thinness of lips, which follows particular patterns according to your geographic origins.

Speaker 3 • 44:19
Hairiness, attached or detached earlobes, or seen the hair, hairline or baldness, toe length, height, protruding belly button. Why might some of these be hard to use? Some of them are hidden. Right. So some anthropologists argue that race is potentially skin colors, potentially one of the easiest ways that Homo sapiens, probably one of the easiest ways that Homo sapiens attempt to distinguish among themselves. But any of these others would potentially be just as tied and also tied in uneven ways to geographical origin. So just to finish with this slide, why can we still talk about race? Will start our class on Wednesday talking about this. Because race is a social construct with meaningful consequences.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Exploring Religious Practice, Land, and Ritual through Anthropological and Legal Lenses
Mar 18, 2026, 10:59 AM • 36 mins

SUMMARY KEYWORDS
religious practice, indigenous religions, Oak Flat, legal recognition, land-based religion, Durkheim, ritual, totemic object, collective effervescence, sacred, memorials, religious liberty, anthropology of religion, group identity, Protestant paradigm

SPEAKERS
Speaker 1, Speaker 2, Speaker 3, Speaker 4

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Speaker 1 • 00:00
And this is about a practice that anthropologists, which is an indigenous, that anthropologists would argue qualify as religious. We're just going to take a moment to watch this.

Speaker 2 • 00:16
To us Apaches, God and angels are in sacred places in nature, not in buildings. Oak Flat is one of those sacred places and has been for thousands of years. If it is destroyed, then a huge part of our identity and our religion is gone forever. Since the nineteen fifties, Oak Flat was protected under federal law. But in twenty fourteen, the government granted a company called Resolution Copper the right to develop a mine that would destroy the sacred site. Lower courts have upheld Resolution Copper Copper's rights. And now the Supreme Court of the United States is our last hope.

Speaker 1 • 01:02
Since twenty twenty one, Notre Dame Law School's Religious Liberty Clinic has worked with a coalition of indigenous groups in the legal battle to protect Oak Flat for the Apache people. This fall, Notre Dame filed an amicus brief to help appeal the case to the US Supreme Court.

Speaker 2 • 01:19
You don't have to be a member of a group to recognize the harm that can come to other groups. The Religious Liberty Initiative was created because our freedom of conscience, our freedom to believe and then live according to our beliefs is the most important and fundamental freedom that we have, not just as Americans, but as humans.

Speaker 1 • 01:42
Religious liberty law hasn't really developed to accommodate land based religions the same way as other religions. There are still groups that are marginalized and having the opportunity to help them has been a real privilege.

Speaker 2 • 01:54
Notre Dame's involvement has meant so much to us because it carries a strong message throughout the country that if they can listen, why can't we?

Speaker 1 • 02:03
The University of Notre Dame asks, what

Speaker 2 • 02:06
would you fight for fighting for religious liberty?

Speaker 1 • 02:09
We are the Fighting Irish.

Speaker 3 • 02:14
Okay?

Speaker 1 • 02:15
So we have this cultural artifact. You're all doing cultural artifact presentations in section. This is a cultural artifact, right? This is an ad from a. An institution, right? An institution of higher education that has a special clinic that focuses on religious liberty that basically makes this argument, which is the same argument that scholars of religion that social theorists, the anthropologists of religion would make, who are looking at many contexts across the world, including the United States. This is about the United States, right? That there are practices, there are practices that should be called religious that are often not legible as religious because they don't fit into a paradigm that is very much inflected by Protestant Christianity. It's very much inflected by practices of going to a building once a week. You could go to a different building.

Speaker 1 • 03:07
Those of you who may be familiar with Christianity or know you may be Christian yourself or no Christians, or you also may be Muslim or Jewish or no members of those practices. You may know that people can go to one church, for example, one week and a different church the next week. Doesn't really matter. It's not connected necessarily to the land or even specifically the location of the building. Right. This is a different conception. This is a conception of land as holding within it sacrality that is central to religious practice. Religious practice in this conception cannot take place somewhere else. It has to take place on a particular piece of land. The first video, if you're interested in that lower quality, but explains that a little bit more. And so what social theorists, anthropologists of religion are very interested in is also that sometimes people can claim actions as religious that others can test.

Speaker 1 • 04:09
We're going to look at some examples of this, but I want to give you some that anthropologists have written about. For example, the slaughtering of animals for ritual sacrifice. We have actually had cases in the United States specifically about this. We have had cases about the uses of hallucinatory drugs like ayahuasca. You've had cases about polygamy in which people who wish to practice polygamy claim it as part of their religious practice. And also, as we just saw right now in this video from Notre Dame, religious rituals that are linked to land in which a ritual has to be carried out on a particular piece of land is not transferable. Something that the courts have often historically not understood as part of this Constitution, constitutionally guaranteed religious freedom. But with that caveat, I would also like to, as anthropologists do, and as we have repeatedly done this class, also think about whether or not this kind of sharp way of discussing the different relationships that indigenous and non indigenous communities may have with land.

Speaker 1 • 05:20
I want to ask you or invite you to think about whether that distinction should really be so sharp. And so thinking then about your own experience. If you're from an indigenous community, not from an indigenous community, are there pieces of land that seem sacred to you? Does anyone have a reaction to that question?

Speaker 3 • 05:49
Yeah,

Speaker 1 • 06:12
That's an excellent point. So your colleague is pointing to, for example, monuments or monuments in Washington, DC

Speaker 4 • 06:20
Right.

Speaker 1 • 06:22
Lincoln Memorial, for example, if it weren't located in Washington, DC might be experienced. Right. As very painful. Yeah, yeah, Interesting. So your colleagues pointing to a conception of maybe a church itself is having sexuality, but the church could be moved, which sometimes they are moved. Yeah, very, very interesting point.

Speaker 4 • 07:00
Yeah,

Speaker 1 • 07:13
Super interesting. So this is in Seattle, there's a waterfall area, that part of it is reserved for indigenous communities who use it for a type of ritual. Very, very interesting. Yeah, absolutely. Holy cities like Mecca and Medina for. In Islam. Holy cities also. Right. Like Jerusalem for multiple. From multiple traditions. My mother did a pilgrimage to Jerusalem and she said when she left she burst into tears very unanticipatedly.

Speaker 4 • 07:48
Right.

Speaker 1 • 07:48
So kind of this particular relationship with place.

Speaker 4 • 07:51
Yeah.

Speaker 1 • 07:54
Cemeteries and burial grounds. You're foreshadowing what we're going to shift to talk about in just a second. Absolutely. So we'll shift to that conversation. But I'll also mention if any of you have ever had to sell a place that you lived in for a long time, perhaps a place that you grew up in, or even just leave a place that you lived in for a long time, potentially a place that you grew up. That can feel kind of painful.

Speaker 4 • 08:14
Right.

Speaker 1 • 08:15
And so this notion also that social theorists sometimes propose that non indigenous peoples are not attached to land is something that also we can qualify.

Speaker 3 • 08:26
Right.

Speaker 1 • 08:27
By thinking about our own experiences or the experiences of people that we may know if we are not indigenous. So I want to talk about. Your colleague just mentioned cemeteries and grave sites. Very interesting example of how in the contemporary moment there are conversations about what is religious, what is not religious, that often the courts in the United States are called upon to define. And that are very interesting to us as anthropologists. As he was thinking, the social theory about where the religious is. And it's worth saying, right. That the passage from life to death. Right. A major moment across many religious traditions. Some religious traditions actually have very clear ideas about what happens at this moment and afterwards. And I want to talk to you about two examples. One is from outside of Massachusetts, one is from Ohio about condensations over grave sites.

Speaker 1 • 09:29
And so we have here, this is from Norton, Massachusetts. You can see here some grave sites. We have a pink flamingo on a grave. We also have. This is a little hard to see, but it's a low quality photo of a Minnie Mouse that is on a grave. And so we had an article from around, actually from about three years later, similar conversations. This is from Kent, Ohio. It's a young man who served in the military and afterwards died in a rafting accident. And this is the grave site that his father prepared. And so you can see there on this grave site, we have a lot of different things. It's very colorful. We have a lot of fake flowers. We have a lot of American flags. He has this individual that served in the military. And we also have photos of the. Of the person who had died. I'm sorry. Well, he had served in The Navy. Yeah, Nebby Navy petty officer.

Speaker 3 • 10:32
So

Speaker 1 • 10:34
the person maintaining this gravesite, decorating this grave site, Adam Mullay's father, was actually taken to court over specifically the insertion of these images of Adam. And the court found that Adam Mallay's father had actually violated cemetery rules that prohibited, quote, excavation, because by putting these stakes into the ground, he had, quote, unquote, excavated a burial site. And what we often see in these conversations is that people who don't like, for example, the pink flamingos, the Minnie Mouses, the very colorful fake flowers is that plaintiffs or complainants will often say these grave sites are not nice to look at. They make an aesthetic argument. They are, as it says here, objectional and, quote, gaudy. Very interesting caveat here, right. The people who are complaining are not the other residents of the cemetery, Right?

Speaker 1 • 11:51
Because everyone in the cemetery has died. It's actually other people who are also maintaining grave sites. Right? So these are all people who are engaged in a type of memorializing of someone who has died. Something that we could make an argument, I think relatively easily is part of religious practice.

Speaker 4 • 12:09
But

Speaker 1 • 12:13
are pink flamingos part of religious practice? Minnie Mouse photos of someone in a Navy uniform, fake flowers? Which of these is protected speech or protected religious practice? This is something that the courts have had to adjudicate. Generally. It's been pretty clear when there is a kind of religious symbol or a scriptural verse, right? So religious symbol like a cross, a crescent, a scriptural verse. The court has said, okay, this is religious, but these other things, are these religious. Are these protected religious practice? And something that we're going to talk a little bit about next week is whether or not this argument about aesthetics, right, this argument that often complainants deploy, that a gravesite, even if very carefully decorated, right. That it looks gaudy, that this is also potentially about class practices.

Speaker 1 • 13:19
Okay, so we've talked so far a little bit about religion as belief, and we've talked about kind of contested practices that non religious specialists, Right, non theologians, these are not people who are trained in religion, have had to decide if these practices are, quote, unquote, properly religious, protected or not. And I want to spend the rest of class thinking with you about how Emile Durkheim conceptualizes religion. And Durkheim is, of course, interested in belief. He's very interested in practice. And he is. And this builds on Rumana's talk from Monday. He's very interested in thinking about religion as anchored in the body, as rooted in affect or emotion. And affect just means emotion, but emotion is. It is kind of transferred among bodies, right? How when someone else feels happy, it may make you feel happy, may also make you feel sad.

Speaker 1 • 14:30
But how affect kind of sweeps through us. And Durkheim is especially interested in how rituals use emotion or harness emotion or affect to reinforce the existence of a group to bind. As he tells us in the excerpt that we read for today, a group together. And I want to just quickly give you kind of bird's eye view of some of his very important arguments about religion. And then we're going to look at some videos together. And I want us to think about what Durkheim would tell us about particular examples of religious practice or things that may be a little bit outside of religious practice. So Durkheim is very famous for describing religion as an eminently social thing. He says that human beings are social creatures. They must live in relationship to. To one another. And religion is basically the thing that makes society possible. It justifies to members of a community things that they can't do even if they really want to do them.

Speaker 1 • 15:42
As Durkheim says at one point in the excerpt that you read for today, religion makes palatable to members of a community the prohibition of their most basic instincts, the prohibition of some actions that they would be potentially, at various moments in their lives, most inclined to do. And something else that Durkheim does that is very important and that is in line with he died in the nineteen tens. That is in line with early anthropology is he is very intentionally studying

Speaker 3 • 16:22
what

Speaker 1 • 16:22
we might call what were considered at the time religions that existed or ways of living that existed at the bottom right of this ladder of salvage ethnography. I'm sorry, at the bottom of the ladder of social evolutionism. Specifically, he's looking at Aboriginal Australian religions and he is juxtaposing these with the religion that is dominant in the place where he is writing in modern day Europe. So he's juxtaposing Aboriginal Australian practices with Christianity. And he is saying, aha. Actually this is all the same form of human practice. And so specifically, Durkheim is interested in totemic religions. So here we have some exam. We have an example of a totem pole. And so he's studying religions in which a particular group centers its religious practice around a particular, often animal and centers its religious ritual often around a depiction of that animal.

Speaker 1 • 17:41
Let's have a cross here. We had earlier on in the semester, right. A cartoon that helped us think about how similar religious practice is in relation to both of these. We could say totems. We're going to think about That a little bit more. Today I'm going to talk with you about what religion, what ritual does for Durkheim, what specifically for him religious ritual is doing. And I want to look at two excerpts from the path from the pages that you read for today. And then I want to look at some videos with you. Could I have a volunteer to read this passage? Any volunteers?

Speaker 4 • 18:44
Once the individuals are gathered together, a sort of electricity is generated from their closeness and quickly launches them to an extraordinary height of exaltation. Every emotion expressed resonates without interference in consciousness that are wide open to external oppressions, each one echoing the others. The affirmative of the. Of the affirmations often become so intense that it leads to outlandish, otherwise prohibited or stigmatized behavior. The passions unleashed are so torrential that nothing can contain them. It is by shouting the same cry, saying the same words, and performing the same action in regard to the same objects that the particip that they, the participants, arrive at and experience agreement. Behavior includes breaking of sexual vestimentary, bodily noise, physical contact, violence.

Speaker 1 • 19:44
Thank you. So this is probably, to me, the most interesting part of Durkheim's analysis. Many interesting parts. His conceptualization of religion, right? He says God is a creation of man, of human beings. But this, to me, is the most important section from what you read for today and the one that I hope you'll think about after class is over. And so we see here that Durkheim is interested in what happens when many people's bodies are close to one another. And he says that from this physical proximity, this often movement in tandem, people start to feel that they are bigger than themselves and they are larger than the limits of their bodies. They feel physically and affectively attached to the people around them. And this state of effervescence, right, of intense, kind of overwhelming, kind of hyper emotion leads to outlandish behavior.

Speaker 1 • 21:10
I want you to think about this next week on Wednesday. But he says, in religious ritual, there's a moment in which the world is temporarily turned upside down, in which the rules that we normally follow are temporarily suspended. And he says that it is by. Moving your bodies in similar ways in proximity to one another, by shouting the same cry, saying the same words, performing the same action in regard to the same object. What is this object? It's an important point. Anyone know what this object is from this passage? The totemic object, right? The object around which the ritual. He's studying Aboriginal Australian ritual. The object around which the ritual circulates or around which it is centered. And so he says, by this centralization of a ritual around the object,

Speaker 3 • 22:30
this

Speaker 1 • 22:30
movement in tandem among the participants, the participants arrive at an experience agreement. They feel right that they are, as this next quote tells us, that they are members of a group. The group itself is restored, is revivified via this ritual that circulates around a particular totemic object, the image. The totemic object goes on calling forth and recalling these emotions. Even after the assembly is over. The totemic object takes on then, these emotions. The emotions seem to exist to the human beings who live in relationship to it. The totemic object seems to hold within it these emotions. And by means of it, the emotions are kept perpetually alive and fresh. And so the object assumes a kind of existence on its own and within it, Durkheim tells us it therefore holds the identity of the group. Imputing the emotions to the image is all the more natural because being common to the group, they can only be related to a thing that is equally common to all.

Speaker 1 • 24:05
The totemic object sustains and revivifies the group. Let me look at some examples with you, and I want you to think about what is the totemic object here? How would Durkheim analyze what is happening in these, I think, religious rituals? So we're going to look at a few examples.

Speaker 3 • 24:39
Protect you.

Speaker 1 • 24:50
Okay, so here we have people calling out to Jesus. This is a kind of ecstatic Christian practice. Totemic object here.

Speaker 3 • 25:07
Yes.

Speaker 1 • 25:08
You can say Jesus, I think so. Let's look at another example. I always try to play this in class because I love this video. Very famous gospel song. Also example from contemporary Christianity.

Speaker 3 • 25:30
Grace. You're in all his goodness. You're in all his mercy. You're in all his provision. He's great and he's greatly to be praised. Hallelujah. Come on, everybody. Lift your hands as we lift our voices.

Speaker 2 • 25:51
Come on.

Speaker 3 • 25:52
Say, my God is awesome. Come on. Say he can move mountain. Keep me in the valley. Come on, say it. Happy from the rain. That's it. My God is awesome. Come on. Heals me when I'm broken. Strength where I've been weaken forever he'll reign. Come on. You got it. My God is awesome.

Speaker 1 • 26:26
You can see here, people right? Physically participating, playing, singing.

Speaker 3 • 26:48
Forever, he'll rain one word. Come on, everybody. My God, come on. Somebody lift your voice and you know it's been good. Say it. Awesome. Awesome. Say my God. My God. Come on. If you.

Speaker 1 • 27:14
Okay, we'll get another example. We see here that there's kind of a callback to the audience, right? He Sings the singer, Charles Jenkins sings. And then the audience kind of repeats. And the chorus, the choir repeats. Okay, we're looking at an example Islam. So this is a really lovely chronic recitation. And I'd like you to pay attention also to the reaction of other people around. Okay, Give me one second. Your zakat for ghaza delivers food, clean water, medical aid.

Speaker 3 • 28:55
You.

Speaker 4 • 29:20
Mar.

Speaker 3 • 29:49
Okay.

Speaker 1 • 29:53
Another very interesting example of religious ritual, of the power of being around other people who are having an emotional reaction. We saw people, right, burying their heads in their hands, very similar to the first video. Some people weeping. And we have here tonight totemic object, potentially the scripture, right? The Holy Quran that is being recited, being recited by one person. Other people there know the scripture, and they are all participating together in this kind of intense emotional reaction to it, to its beauty, to the beauty of the recitation, to the beauty of the words. And so we have here. Examples of how rituals centered around a particular totemic object creates, reinforces, gives new life to a group, reaffirms the existence of the group. This is what Durkheim was interested in. And Durkheim is also interested.

Speaker 1 • 31:03
And this is what I'd like to spend the rest of class thinking about with you. He was also interested in the ways that totemic objects and rituals around totemic objects appear in places that would be outside of what social theorists were thinking of religion at the time. Very famous quote from the excerpt that you read. This was outside of the recommended page range. You might not have seen it, but I did want to highlight it to you, bring it to your attention. Durham writes, the soldier who falls defending his flag certainly does not believe he has sacrificed himself to a piece of cloth. This is an example of how totemic objects take on the meanings and the emotions that are invested in them through ritual and is useful for us also in thinking about where religion is, where religion stops, and maybe the blurry ways that we use this word. Religion could also use the word sacrality, right?

Speaker 1 • 32:12
Sacred. And I want to think, just for the final few minutes of class, about other places that Durkheim might be useful to us. And I would invite you that we won't talk about it together necessarily, to think about what this tells us about the sacred and contemporary, for example, American life, the very least, the life that you. The place that you are currently living in. Morgan Wallen concert. Okay, so that particular tiktoker wrote that feeling. And in the comments, that feeling when everyone is singing. Okay, so an example, I think a really nice kind of visceral example of what Durkheim is talking about, that electricity that is generated when many bodies are close together and moving at the same time. And here we'll finish with a sports example. So I've sometimes been taught this class assigned an article from the Conversation that argues that football games are religious experiences.

Speaker 1 • 34:17
This, at the very least, is a good example of how something that we talked about earlier on in the semester, how participation in sporting events, the proximity of many bodies being close together, the difference between watching a game at home by yourself and going to see the game or watching the game with other people, how that brings into being a particular community, revivifies that community around a totemic object, the totemic object, of course, being the sports team. So we have discussed religion today

Speaker 3 • 34:57
in

Speaker 1 • 34:58
the way that anthropologists of religion talk about it as belief, something that we are perhaps predisposed to see studying as we are in institutions of higher learning in the contemporary United States, where our understanding of religion is highly inflected by Protestantism. Also, religion as practice. We've also talked about religion as experience or emotion rooted in practice, something that we started talking about with Rumana on Monday. For Friday you have a podcast with Liz Bukar. And then you have a very short excerpt in which Liz Bukar is thinking about religious borrowing versus appropriation in relation to another religious pilgrimage in Spain. I'll see you on Friday. If you have any questions about the undergraduate journal. I feel like it doesn't really matter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Pilgrimage, Grief, and Agency: Ethnographic Reflections on the Najaf-Karbala Walk
Mar 16, 2026, 10:54 AM • 34 mins

SUMMARY KEYWORDS
Najaf, Karbala, pilgrimage, Imam Hussain, grief, hope, agency, anthropology, Pakistani Shia women, ritual, endurance, kinship, gender segregation, politics, borders, martyrs, shrines, memory, poetry, collective experience

SPEAKERS
Speaker 1

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Speaker 1 • 00:00
From Thailand. The urban wall has also been historically used for political purposes. So last summer there were quite a few camps from Palestine and there were quite a few demons demonstrations as well. These are some pictures from my three pilgrimages to Najaf. So the shrine of Imam Ali, interior and exterior. There's also some photos of Wadi es Salaam, which is one of the largest and oldest cemeteries in the world, currently in Najaf. This is a picture inside the shrine of the tomb of Imam Ali. So the red and black signify that the tomb was decorated for a morning pilgrimage. And the green and white signifies the celebratory pilgrimage. And also during normal days in Najaf, the tomb looks somewhat like the green and white. Some photos of Karbala Sacred spaces, shrines, interior and exterior. This is the tomb of Imam Hussain. Again, red and black for mourning and green and white for celebrations.

Speaker 1 • 01:09
It is interesting to note that Imam Hussain's tomb actually has six corners because he is buried with two of his sons. Tomb of Abbas, whose shrine is adjacent to Imam Hussen's in Karbala. Again, red and black for mourning, green and white for celebrations. But you can see that they're frequented a lot by both local Iraqis and international people visiting during all times of the year. So for the next half of this presentation, I invite you to walk with me from Najaf to Karbala. I will share short videos that I filmed during the final night of the journey. I complete by ethnographic vignettes from my conversations with fellow Pakistani Shia pilgrims. So this is what a poll looks like. So you can see that there are photos. There's also a number in English and Arabic. So this is a picture of poll number two when we started the walk. In this poll in particular, we see that there are two photos of Iraqi martyrs and the photos keep on increasing due to the current conflict in the Middle East.

Speaker 1 • 02:32
Your crocs look really comfortable, remarked my pilgrimage sister, Sakina. I told her I had bought them specially for my trips to Kerbala, and I had bought the same pair for my mother, which we had worn together on an earlier pilgrimage. These are my mother's shoes and every step that I take towards Karbala is for my mother, said Sakina, pointing towards her feet. I had gathered from earlier conversations that her mother had died a few years ago and it had been an incredibly difficult time for her. At this time, another pilgrimage, Sister Mehak, caught up with us and offered us some cups of water which she had picked up from a nearby stall when she heard what we had been talking about. She shared the story of her dad's sudden death a couple of years ago. My siblings always wondered how I would live without my dad. And when the time came, it was incomprehensible.

Speaker 1 • 03:26
He didn't even have a long illness. He died a month after he was diagnosed with cancer. I had barely registered the fact that he was leaving and then he was gone, Mehak said, tears pooling in her big eyes. We hugged her, and Sakina advised Mehak to pray for her forgiveness with each step she takes towards Karbala. So there are three interrelated dynamics in the vignette that I've just shared with you. So we see that physical hardship, the pain during the walk itself, proves devotion and sincerity. We see that pain is not meaningless, but is actually a sign of sincerity. We also see that pain for Imam Hussain is intertwined with personal grief and loss. And lastly, we see that grief transforms into hope and hardship itself becomes a pathway towards renewal. Notice that neither Sakina nor Mahak claim that their pain has disappeared. Instead, hope for them is emerging in the act of walking itself.

Speaker 1 • 04:30
Grief is not erased. It is redirected towards the walk from Najaf to Karbala. Hope here is not optimism. It is the belief that going to Karbala does something for people. So before we move forward, I wanted to ask you guys, why is it that we might interpret physical suffering as meaningful rather than always as something that's negative and this doesn't necessarily have to be in just a religious context. Why do physical hardships matter. In remembrance of something or something giving that something value? Absolutely. So it shows endurance and a physical hardship. Using the body, putting the body in pain also shows dedication and sincerity. That gives a mental suffering a physical outlet and a way to process it. You might not be able to do purely through just thinking. Absolutely. So there's a sense of catharsis in which the physical hardship becomes almost an outlet.

Speaker 1 • 06:23
Excellent. So some of the thoughts that I had here that have already been brought up is that they show devotion, they show commitment. It could be done to honor someone, and it can also make you feel closer to something or someone's sacred. Anthropology cares so much about this vignette that I shared because it shows us how suffering becomes meaningful in certain contexts and in different cultures. These are some photos of statues that were built by the Iraqis during the walk. They depict the different martyrs of Karbala. So to my right you can see Abbas because Abbas lost both his hands. The kid in the cradle is Imam Hussain's six month old son who was also killed in the battle. And then here you have Imam Hussain and the women are weeping him, his sister and his daughters. It was around two AM and we had already crossed pole number twelve hundred.

Speaker 1 • 08:04
This meant that there were no resting places beyond this point. And the bathrooms were also not great. We had to keep walking and enter Karbala at all costs. By the morning, Sakina and I walked in front of the group as we were the fastest. The others walked slowly behind us as they had blisters on their feet. The streets were well lit with string lights and tents that served fries, fried chicken, yogurt drinks, tang lemonade and many other different kinds of beverages. We all had a weakness for eating fries post midnight. The last leg of the journey was all about carbs and somehow the fries were the best ones we had had in a very long time. In this vignette that I've just read, we see that religious experience is not always just pain. It is not always quiet and solemn. It can also be midnight fries and lemonade with pilgrimage sisters. And this reminds us, as was already brought up in our discussion right now is that religion is not separate from our bodies.

Speaker 1 • 09:07
It happens through hunger, thirst and fatigue. We've already discussed this, but I'm just going to reiterate this. Why does physical exhaustion and hardship make a religious experience more powerful? Or you can also think about it. How have you ever felt closer to someone after we have gone through a difficult time together? Or have you ever really prepared hard for something and then felt really good when you achieve it? So again, this shows you that you care and that pain makes you vulnerable. And when you're pushed to your limits, the emotional gets a physical outlet, as was already pointed out. So this vinya tells us that faith is not something people just passively believe in. It is lived through bodies and experienced through hunger, heat. And it is also endured A photo of along the pilgrimage route of posters depicting the war of the battle of different martyrs of Karbala and members of Imam Hussen's family.

Speaker 1 • 10:10
So their faces are often blocked out and they just put lights up there because nobody wants to know what they look like because they were too sacred for us to know what they look like. It was time for the Fajr prayer, the dawn prayer. We stopped at a shabby resting place where the women's section was extremely cramped and there was barely enough space to spread a prayer mat. We stood one by one and quickly said our prayers amidst women who were snoring and Sleeping. I was amazed by how people could fall asleep just like that because during the past two nights I had not gotten more than two hours of sleep as I was extremely bothered by the chatting of women and the heat. We sat on the sidewalk after we had offered our prayers and rested our feet. We were at pole twelve fifty and the city of Karbala was only fifty poles and three kilometers away. After nearly an hour and a half of walking, we saw the sign we had been waiting for.

Speaker 1 • 11:28
A black billboard that said welcome Visitors of Hussen. I lifted my left leg to examine the sole of my foot and there it was. The signs of a blister under my toe. I knew the stinging pain had meant something. As Sakina handed me a cleaning wipe, Arzu smiled and said that Imam Hussain had accepted my efforts for pain during pilgrimage was only reserved for Imam Hussen's favorite pilgrims. It was five thirty AM and the temperature had already reached one hundred degrees. We could now see the makeshift entrance to Karbala, which is in this photo, the tent with the lights. As we neared the gate, Sakina remarked that every year Imam Hussain sends his half brother Abbas to his entrance to welcome his pilgrims. A lump formed in my throat. I saw Abbas, a tall, impressive figure with no hands, for Abbas had lost both his hands in the battle of Kerbala. He was smiling at me.

Speaker 1 • 12:36
I sat down on the sidewalk and cried. My heart felt like it would burst out of my chest. I had never experienced grief like that. As I composed myself, I was surprised to find the three women that I had been walking with were sitting next to me, crying inconsolably. I had no idea when they had sat down next to me. It was the twelfth of August, and along with twenty two million pilgrims, we had been walking for the past three nights and had just completed the eighty kilometer pilgrimage from Najaf to Karbala. So let's pause here for a second and think about what has happened in this one night that I've just shared with all of you. So there. There are a couple of things that are happening here. So women mourn something that happened fourteen hundred years ago, but they experience it as happening in the present. They see a baas without hands, but a baas lost his hands fourteen hundred years ago.

Speaker 1 • 13:33
Imam Hussain listens to their worries and prayers as they walk along the route. And they also imagine futures shaped by these encounters. As anthropologists, we are interested in how people experience time. Not just clock time, but also ritual and emotional time. So building on these vignettes and anecdotes I'm now going to blow up the discussion towards bigger questions that connect to some of the themes we have already discussed in class. These are some of the bigger questions that I'm grappling with in my dissertation stage right now as I'm preparing for a year long dissertation fieldwork in Iraq and Pakistan. The first question that I'm thinking about in my work is what if the past is not over? What if it is layered into the present? And what if it has the capacity to alter futures? Getting rid of linear time. Anthropologists have gotten rid of linear time a long time ago, but we're still figuring out more case studies on what the ways in which it impacts our ways of living and our experiences along with time.

Speaker 1 • 14:42
I'm also thinking about who has agency in this story that I've shared with you. So what do you guys think? Who has the capacity to act, who is acting and who is participating in the Irving Walk? There are a couple of stakeholders. Let's shout them out. Who is going to the walk? Muslims from different countries. You know, both men and women. Yeah, great. So the pilgrims is one who has the capacity to act. Who are some of the other people or non human entities who were actively participating in this walk? The pools. Okay. The devotional markers. Very good. Other thoughts. Right. The ghosts. Very good. So some of the things, the people that I think are relevant or objects are obviously the pilgrims, Imam Hussein Abbas and the martyrs of Karbala, who are granting wishes. The shrines themselves as objects and spaces that provide a particular kind of experience.

Speaker 1 • 16:22
The caravan that organizes the entire trip. And there's of course me, the anthropologist who has a lot of agency in trying to decide what stories to tell and how to narrate the experiences. I also want to just signal here that anthropologists like Alfred Gehl have argued that agency is not just found in humans, but can also be found and exercised by non living objects. So the idea that objects shape action has informed much of current anthropology. Another question that I'm playing around with is instead of asking whether divine presence is real, anthropology asks what does this experience do in the lives of the pilgrims themselves? How does it reorient grief and how does it create hope. And then putting that in conversation with agency itself? How do we theorize agency in anthropology when hope is produced neither solely through human endeavor or divine intercession alone, but through their entanglement?

Speaker 1 • 17:33
So what does it mean to see Abbas and ask Abbas to grant you wishes and then work really hard for it? What does non human agency tell us about Human agency itself. So just some of the questions that are on my mind right now. Many of the women that I met during the walk referred to Imam Ali, whose shrine is in Najaf, as their father. On the anniversary of his death, they say they feel orphaned. Other women say that Imam Hussain gave them sisters. Women who are strangers become kin by walking together. So as we have already talked about in this class during Kinship Week, that anthropology teaches us that kinship is not just biology. It is made and chosen through ritual, memory, and time. So when my interlocutors say that their father died fourteen hundred years ago, they're not speaking metaphorically. Rather, they're showing us a very different kind of relatedness.

Speaker 1 • 18:34
In my research, I focus exclusively on women due to strict gender segregation in Iraq. And women inhabit female only spaces and sleep together in communal and massive halls, share food, and take care of one another. And I argue here that gender segregation does not simply restrict women in this case, but it produces a particular kind of intimacy. When women walk together, sleep together, pray shoulder to shoulder, something changes. Vulnerability and grief become collective and shareable. We might ask ourselves here what kind of relationships become possible in these spaces. In many conversations about Muslim women, and perhaps even today, the focus is on whether they're oppressed or liberated. I think this is the wrong question. Feminist anthropology tells us that agency need not always look like rebellion, but it can also look like endurance.

Speaker 1 • 19:35
In the case of my interlocutors, agency may look like walking eighty kilometers in one hundred degrees, it may look like continuing despite blisters on your feet, and it may look like choosing to interpret pain as meaningful. Thus endurance is non passivity. And then I'm sure some of you are wondering what happens to these Pakistani Shia women once pilgrimage is over and they're back in Pakistan. So obviously the story does not end upon reaching Karbala. So one of my main core things to do in my dissertation field work is to follow up with these women once they are in Pakistan and asked them the following question. So did their prayers get answered? How? What if they were not answered? Then how are they coping with the uncertainty? And what happens if their prayers are just not answered and they feel disappointed? We also see that religion, particularly today, is not just belief in the divine.

Speaker 1 • 20:39
It is entangled with politics, borders and war. Hope is not just felt, but it is also tested. And here I want to share a story from one of my field trips to Iraq last summer in June of twenty twenty five, where I went for a celebratory pilgrimage. But this was right during the Iran, Israel, war. So the day I got to Iraq, the airspace was closed because the war had broken out. And we had a family with us who had traveled with us from Karachi. It comprised of a man, his wife, his two kids under the age of five, and the man's mom. And the man was very, very stressed because he lived in Saudi with his family. And Saudi Arabia has been historically oppressive towards Shia Muslims. Things are changing now, but it's still difficult to be openly Shia in Saudi Arabia. And so he had not told his boss that he was in Iraq. He had told him that he was just going to Pakistan.

Speaker 1 • 21:35
And so his boss could not understand why he wasn't able to return to Saudi Arabia because the airspace in Iraq and Iran was closed and not in Pakistan. So he's very, very stressed. He's talking to the caravan organizer. His mother is praying every day in the shrines, but nothing is happening. And then one day, he comes up to the caravan organizer and says to him that he's going to enter Saudi Arabia via road because Saudi Arabia has a border with Iraq. And so at night, his wife and his mother say bye to all the women of the group. And we hear at like three or four AM they have got in a cab and now they're on their way to Saudi Arabia. Almost twelve hours later, fifteen hours later, we hear that they're on their way back because they were not allowed to cross the border in Saudi Arabia because Saudi government had only opened its borders for his citizens.

Speaker 1 • 22:27
So they were coming back, and the man was kind of doing this walk of shame because the caravan organizers had told him not to leave. It was a huge risk, and it was a very difficult journey to cross the desert via road, especially with young kids and an old mom. But the thing that I found most interesting was the following morning when they came back, we were talking to his mom, and she said this multiple times, that every time she was on the wave from Iraq to Saudi Arabia and then back, she said that she only thought of Imam Hussain. She thought of Imam Hussain and how fourteen hundred years ago, he had walked on the same path when he had come with his family from Saudi Arabia to Iraq. And then when she was returning, when the Saudi government had not let them enter, she was thinking about his arrival in Karbala fourteen hundred years ago. And she said she cried the whole night because she thought about how she was comfortably sitting in a cab, but Imam Hussain and his children and his family was sitting on camels in severe heat.

Speaker 1 • 23:28
They did not even have water at some point. So I find this story quite interesting because I think it points towards several things that I'm interested in. So, again, we see the grief of Imam Hussein is intertwined with personal anxiety and uncertainty, and we also see hope for a better future. So when she said that they were turned away from the Saudi border, they thought that Imam Hussain had another plan for them, and so they trusted his judgment and came back. Of course, as jarringly obvious, we see the rule of borders and war and the present, and we see the test of hope in this vignette. As anthropologists, how do we then make sense of these vulnerable moments that occur in times of great physical duress? In what ways do pilgrims perceive of Abbas and other divine figures as mediators who transform grief into intercession and possibility?

Speaker 1 • 24:25
How do bodily practices of walking and crying channel grief into hope? And how do pilgrims describe this transition? How do sensory experiences of dust, hunger, heat and fatigue mediate between physical and emotional pain and a sense of renewed hope? How can a journey be so full of pain and hardship on also be called a journey of love? The walk from Najaf to Karbala is not about distance. It's about transformation. Each blister, each tear, each whispered prayer becomes a way of turning grief into love, pain into hope. For me and my pilgrimage sisters, the journey was never just about reaching a shrine. It was about walking together, caring for one another, and finding strength together. Our stories remind us that the body itself can become a vessel of faith, that endurance, exhaustion, and emotion are also forms of devotion. As anthropologist Amira Mittermeier writes, ethnography invites us into life worlds that we might not otherwise notice.

Speaker 1 • 25:33
So how do we then deal and write about these narratives of grief? So. So does anybody remember the one person who also showed up in your midterm who had the same dilemma of dealing with grief, personal and the grief of his interlocutors? Absolutely. So, Renaldo Rosaldo Grief and Head Enters Rage. Where Rosaldo focuses on emotions and how they act as active forces that shape our experiences. And what we didn't read in this class is that he actually used poetry and photos and maps and sketches to make sense of the grief that he was experiencing and the ways in which it brought him closer to his interlocutors. So, building on Rosaldo, I have also been working on making a portfolio of poetry and photos. And to end my presentation today, I will share a short poem and an excerpt from this portfolio that I'm calling Acts of Mourning and Acts of Hope. And the poem that I'll share with you.

Speaker 1 • 26:39
Today is called this is the Land of Abbas. And what I've done in this poem is that I've looked at how spaces work together and how time moves fluidly and how we look at the entanglement of grief and hope during pilgrimage. So here is the poem. In Majali's morning gatherings, the orator often narrates that the dungeon of Damascus had no roof. In evenings, Sakina used to watch the birds fly away, and she would ask Sajad, oh brother, where do these birds go? Sajjad would stroke her hair lovingly and say, the birds return home. Sakina, oh brother, when will we go home? Sakina never went home. The roofless dungeon echoed with her voice, silenced forever. As the door opened and it was announced that the prisoners were free to go home, Zaynab demanded that Yazid return the heads of the martyrs and few other things that they had forcefully taken. Yazid's men returned with seventy two heads, several burnt chaldars, burned pieces of wood from Al Yazghar's cradle, and Sakina's earrings.

Speaker 1 • 27:50
Yazid's wife Hind had sent new chowders for the women of Karbala to wear on their way home. Zaynab told Sajjad that they would go to Karbala first to observe the urbain of her beloved brothers. The caravan set off and Zaynab demanded that the camels get them there as soon as possible. As they neared Karbala, they saw two men standing near the grave of Abbas. One man was bent over the grave. As the caravan neared the grave, the old blind man stood up and said, o caravan, if you're friends of Hussain, then you're welcome. But if you're enemies of Hussain, you must return. Because beyond this point, y abbas ki jagir hai this land belongs to Abbas. Sajaz rushed ahead to hug Jaber IBN Abdullahi Ansari, an old companion of the Prophet. Zainab, dropped herself from the camel's saddle and crawled towards the grave of Abbas, putting sand in her hair and calling out to her brother, who was the feudal lord of Karbala until eternity.

Speaker 1 • 28:54
In Mosayib, a small town just outside of Karbala, streets are full of carts selling dates. The date sellers proudly claim that the dates are from the farm of Abbas. In nineteen seventy seven, Saddam Hussein bent the urbane walk. In nineteen ninety one, his forces open fire at the shrine of Imam Hussain. On the day of Ashura. In two thousand six, Al Qaeda destroyed the golden dome of the shrine of Imam Hassan. Askari in Samra. In twenty sixteen, Zainab's shrine was attacked by isis. In twenty twenty five, flags of Yahushain were taken down from the shrines of Zainab and Sakina in Damascus. In twenty twenty five, twenty two million pilgrims entered Karbala on foot to commemorate Irbane. The pilgrims had food, water and had rested in air conditioned mocaps on their way to Abbas's land. Some saw Abbas at the entrance and wondered if he had waited fourteen hundred years ago to welcome his beloved niece Sakina, who never made it.

Speaker 1 • 30:00
Some walk with tears in their eyes as they imagined Sajjad who cried every time he prostrated in prayer because he remembered that Abbas had no hands when he fell from his horse. Some remember Zainab who never mourned her sons Aun and Muhammad until she went home to Medina and saw two prayer mats in the courtyard of her home. Fourteen hundred years ago, Imam Hussain said halman Nasan yan Surna, is there anyone to help me? Fourteen hundred years later, twenty one million pilgrims entered Karbala saying, we are here for you O Imam Hussain. Tears in their eyes, their tired feet inch closer to pole four thousand and fifty two which is in front of the baby Qibla of Abbas. At this entrance you can see the tomb of Abbas. Say to yourself, this is the land of Abbas. To say that this is Abbas land is not just a devotional statement. It is an anthropological claim about memory, protection, belonging, suffering and grief across centuries.

Speaker 1 • 31:10
To do anthropology then is to walk with others and not just to write about them. It is to allow their worlds to reshape how we understand time, agency and reality itself. And with that I will stop talking and open up the floor for questions. Comments, Epiphany these advice, suggestions, concerns. Yes, so absolutely so. Religion, as was pointed out, has been historically considered or, you know, viewed with skepticism about not being real or being a figment of imagination. But as the Arba walk tells us that it is very much real. It is formed and restructured and recreated through exposure with different people and tells us a lot about culture and religion together. I also want to connect this to our reading of Durkheim on Wednesday. So Durkheim historically very much associated and obsessed with categories and urbane pilgrimage and pilgrimage in general tells us how categories are defined.

Speaker 1 • 32:37
So what is religious, is now social, is also political, is also economic, and also has implications for gender and agency itself. So great question. Comment Other thoughts for the next five minutes that we're here? What did you think was the hardest part about the walk. That's a great question. What did I think was the hardest part about the walk? I think there were several factors because when we stayed in the walk, we stayed in, like a resting place that had like four thousand other women. So, like, using the bathrooms was a mess, but also it was just very hot. And then to every. All women obviously wear the hijab. So that was also. If we're not used to it, I think it's like. It can be, like, quite cumbersome to do that. Yeah. Yes. So which Abbas was I talking about in my presentation? So the Abbas that I'm talking about is the son of Imam Ali, the brother of Imam Hussain, who is buried in Karbila along with Imam Hussain.

Speaker 1 • 34:07
No. So this is not the founder of the Abbasid dynasty, which is based on an uncle of Rafid Muhammad also named Abbas. Great question. Thank you for the clarification. Let's take one more question before we end class.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Exploring Symbolic Anthropology and Power Dynamics
Mar 5, 2026, 5:26 PM • 39 mins

SUMMARY KEYWORDS
kinship, Foucault, Althusser, Gramsci, cultural hegemony, Timothy Mitchell, fetishism of the state, standard language ideology, power dynamics, exclusion

SPEAKERS
Speaker 1

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Speaker 1 • 00:00
To record, but no one, no one's speaking, so. So everyone's just writing. So can we review Gertz and Hurston? Sure. So Gertz, right, Symbolic. Clifford Gertz, symbolic anthropologist, wrote a very famous piece that we read together in class called Deep Notes on a Balinese Cock Fight. Clifford Geertz is part of a shift towards, again, symbolic anthropology, thinking about cultures as texts, as symbols that live in the minds of the participants. Raymond Carroll is very much in the vein of Clifford Gertz, right. Raymond Carroll, interested in how French and American people make sense of conversation and make sense of the home, the kind of implicit ideas and meanings and logics that they associate with words, with silence, with different spaces of the home. And so Gertz is again part of this move in symbolic anthropology, where culture.

Speaker 1 • 01:26
Where culture is thought about as something that is actually primarily mental or accessible via its mental representations, its symbols, its meanings as invested in symbols. And Gertz in Notes on a Balinese Cockfight, right, has a few different arguments, but his most important argument that we talked about in class was his argument about deep play. So he gets the term deep play from, I believe, Jeremy Bentham, English philosopher. And he says deep play is an activity that seems so high stakes that no logical person would engage in it. And so Gertz says the betting on Balinese cockfights that he sees when he's doing his research in Bali is an example of deep play. The stakes are so high, so much money can be lost and is often lost each time. It doesn't make any sense why anyone would engage in betting on cockfights. And what Gertz ends up discovering, right, he is looking again for the insider's point of view, for the native point of view.

Speaker 1 • 02:39
He's trying to understand the Balinese cockfights from the inside, on the part of or from the perspective of the people who are participating in these fights, who are grooming their roosters to participate, who are betting on the roosters, fights amongst themselves. Gertz says, well, in fact, the betting that happens, where people lose a lot of money and they seem to bet on roosters who aren't actually winning and aren't actually that good. He says the betting choices that are made actually rely on or are reflections of kinship networks. People bet on the roosters of their kin, and it's not actually whether or not they think a rooster will win or not that conditions their bet, but it's rather whether or not the rooster's owner is someone who is close to them or is someone who is the enemy, for example, of their enemy or the friend of their enemy, etcetera.

Speaker 1 • 03:38
So it is really about the relationship among the better and the rooster owner that explains the seemingly illogical behavior. And we talked about this in relation to football. We talked about American football being a very high stakes game. We also talked about how people still support teams even when the teams repeatedly lose. And so this is kind of a contemporary American parallel to what Gertz is writing about. So in terms of Zora Neale Hurston, Zora Neale Hurston we read early on in the semester, right? She, we read the introduction, chapter one of Mules and Men, her very famous ethnographic book. Hurston was of course, also a fiction writer. Their Eyes Were Watching God is one of her books that some people read in North America when they were in grade school or high school. So, so Hurston was a student of Franz Boas, right. Early kind of father of American anthropology, proponent of cultural relativism.

Speaker 1 • 04:43
Right. Again, this claim that cultures need to be understood from the inside, from the insider's point of view, not from an ethnocentric point of view. Right? With ethnocentric meaning from the point of view of an observer who assumes that his culture or her culture is superior to that of the observed, to the culture of the observed. And so Hurston went to, she was studying, she was in New York. She was part of the Harlem Renaissance. She was friends with many people in the Harlem Renaissance. And she went under the guidance of Franz Boas to Eatonville, Florida, to a self governed black town in central Florida. And there she did the fieldwork that she documents in, In Mules and Men and what we read about, right? We read specifically about folklore that she gathered, but we also see her do other things. If you remember, she goes to a tow party where it's kind of like this dating game, like almost like a.

Speaker 1 • 05:49
It's not really speed dating game, it's like a dating game and everybody gets really drunk and people are driving drunk. And she, she documents all this. She writes all of this down. She writes down also how some of the men are disappointed in when they discover whose toes they have purchased. So she really gives us a look onto scenes of life in Eatonville in the late nineteen twenties. But as we also talked about, to the disappointment or dismay of some of her contemporaries, who, other black intellectuals who felt that because of the representation problem, because black Americans had been represented in such a negative way, they felt that critics of Hurston felt that a different kind of American blackness needed to be uplifted and depicted in books and on the kind of national scene. And so they really reproached Hurston for showing, you know, black Americans getting drunk and saying off color jokes and also speaking nonstandard English because as we talked about in class, she reproduced the speech of the residents of Eatonville in her text.

Speaker 1 • 07:23
So she tries to write how people speak to really capture the local dialect. A bit off topic. What is tomorrow's class content? So tomorrow's class content is we're reading two pieces, so we're going to be talking about basically androcentrism and patriarchy, two concepts which will not be on this exam but will be on your final exam. So we have a, a reading by Emily Martin about how how ideas about gender have shaped science as it is told in textbooks. And then we're also reading a piece by a Mormon mom, influencer, Gabrielle Blair, called Ejaculate Responsibly. Can you explain or review Sienna Craig, the ends of Kinship? Sure. So Sienna Craig, the Ends of Kinship. So we read. We read just a short excerpt from later on in her ethnography. And her ethnography is interested in the Nepalese diaspora. It is interested in how people maintain relationships across distance, including relationships with kin.

Speaker 1 • 08:44
We talked about with Siena Craig in relation to Sienna Craig, love marriages versus arranged marriages. And we talked about some of the reasons that Craig discusses. Some people may prefer arranged marriages and also some of the risks of love marriages, the potential instability of love marriages. And often how the lines between loved and arranged marriages are quite blurred because some people, as the couple whose wedding Craig is at because she attends a wedding, right in the section that we read, a Nepalese wedding in New York City, how that wedding, how that partnership began as an arranged marriage but eventually became a love marriage. And Craig is also interested in some of the other terms that we talked about in class, polygamy, polygyny and polyandry. Specifically, she tells us about an example of fraternal polyandry in which two brothers are married to one woman.

Speaker 1 • 09:51
And we she talks a little bit about and we talked more so about in lecture, the advantages of this, right? Often preservation of family resources is one way that people may explain it. Sienna Craig also talks about an example of a love relationship, a love marriage that was fraternal polyandry. So two brothers married to one woman. And in relation to Craig, we also talked about Craig's writing style, how Craig, we see Craig in her ethnography being embarrassed when she asks questions that she thinks are actually kind of impolite and she realizes after she writes them and she. I'm sorry, after she asked them. And then she writes this in her ethnography. And so we see her kind of reflecting on her insider outsiderness in this particular, In. In this particular piece, in the particular piece that we read. But in terms of Craig, I would say, you know, what's, what's very important is really how she helps us think about some of the big terms that we talked about in our kinship week, which would be polygamy.

Speaker 1 • 11:05
So in the form of polygyny, one man, multiple women, polyandry, one woman, multiple men. But also other things about, you know, household formations. So patrilocality, living with the family of the husband in a marriage, matrilocality, living with the family of a woman in a marriage. And also neolocality, a newly formed couple living by themselves. Something that is quite frequent, quite widespread in some parts of the world, specifically in the west, though not only, and that is sometimes aspirational for people that Craig is working with who are moving among these different locations. So from, you know, Nepal to New York City, etcetera. Other questions, other things that are unclear. While I wait for some, for any other questions, I'm just going to quickly review some of the previous questions since we weren't recording in terms of the format of the exam.

Speaker 1 • 12:42
Right. Select all that apply multiple choice, fill in the blank. Very short essays, one to two paragraphs, mostly one paragraph, one very short answer, one sentence response. Cheat sheet can be front and back, handwritten, typed. However you would like. Normal size paper. Please jump in a poster board. The exam will probably take all fifty minutes. In terms of understanding the readings, some of our readings have been very challenging. So you would especially want to pay attention to how we have discussed the readings in class. But please don't limit yourself to that. Please look at how we have discussed them in class. Then go back to the readings and look in context at how, for example, a particular passage that we highlighted appeared and revisit that larger passage. Okay, can you please go over the differences between Foucault and Althusser's understandings of how states work?

Speaker 1 • 13:37
Yeah, very, very good question. So both Foucault and Althusser as well as Gramsci have a big question, which is how is it that states continue to extract obedience from their citizens or subjects even though they don't use the brute force of the sovereign that we saw in the pre modern period? And that brute force is what opens Foucault's peace? Right. The brute force is that terrible torture scene in which a man who has been accused of attempting to assassinate Louis the fifteenth is his body is basically torn to pieces, right? So Foucault, Altizera and Gramsci are all trying to answer this question. How is it that states still extract obedience? And their answer is that states extract obedience via the consent of the populations. And so they then all three try to understand how this obedience, how this consent is created. Gramsci is interested in cultural hegemony.

Speaker 1 • 14:50
He's interested in how the ruling classes create ideas that justify or prop up their position in power, their kind of suitability as the best, smartest, most capable rulers or holders of resources. And Gramsci says these ideas, we talked about standard language, ideology as an example. These ideas spread out through society, through the media, through churches, through schools. So through what we would call civil society, what is not the state. Althusser is very similar to Gramsci, but Althusser says the state in civil society, there's no big difference. His concept is the concept of the ideological state, state apparatus. And Althusser proposes also that ideas that prop up the state as it is, for example, ideas of capitalism. He was writing in the kind of sixties, seventies, so he was very concerned about capitalism and about the potential moral cost of capitalism.

Speaker 1 • 16:12
And so Altizer says the individuals who live under a particular state kind of drink in the ideas of, for example, capitalism via same thing as Gramsci, schools, media, churches, unions. And it's difficult for them to imagine that their state or society could look otherwise. It's difficult for them to imagine, for example, a society or a state that was not capitalist. And so Althusser is a little more. He's a little more concerned about how difficult it is to see outside of these ideas. And so that's. We spoke very briefly about Anne Allison's piece, which we did not read and will not be on the exam as kind of a separate assigned reading. But. But the way that she uses Althusser we talked about very briefly in lecture and could be on the exam, which is basically, she looks at Obentos, right? These school lunches in Japan that mothers prepare for their children.

Speaker 1 • 17:24
They're asked by schools to repair these very labor intensive, very aesthetically pleasing lunches for their children. And so Alison uses Althusser to say, you know, the kind of state via the school is asking mothers to expend an enormous amount of labor and time in creating these lunches. And it is difficult for them to see themselves as successful, as good mothers, as good people, if they do not do this. Thing. And so this is a way that these mothers are kind of caught up in the, in the snares of this system that they live under. It's actually difficult for them to contest this particular representation of what a good mother would do. So Althusser is very concerned about that. Gramsci is not. Gramsci thinks that it is possible for the ruling class to change. So he sees classes, ruling groups. Groups is constantly competing for power. Foucault.

Speaker 1 • 18:36
Foucault has a different approach in that he uses a term called discipline. And he's not concerned about power as a kind of top down system of domination. He actually says the top down system of domination doesn't exist anymore. He says what actually is happening is that people are disciplining themselves. This is why his book is called Discipline and Punish. He says, we think that in the contemporary moment, he's writing in the nineteen eighties, that we live in a society that is more humane and less violent, but in fact the violence is just different and perhaps harder to see. Foucault takes us specifically to the contemporary institution of the Panopticon, which was a way that schools and also prisons, hospital wards were organized in which there was a kind of center, watchtower or center of kind of surveillance around which many different rooms were stationed.

Speaker 1 • 19:42
And so Foucault says in the modern period, the state has extracted obedience from people because people know that they could always potentially be being watched. And so they actually take it on themselves to discipline themselves. And sometimes they don't even realize it. They actually see this as kind of a form of virtue, as something that is that they are doing that is good and right. So that's very similar to Gramsci and Althusser, but kind of, I would say the overarching ideas, right, are about how states extract obedience from citizens without the constant use of arbitrary and intense kind of torture and violence. Between Timothy Mitchell and his ideas, is it fair to say that Gramsci to Altazero de Foucault, the role of ruling class is gradually more internalized by the individuals in the state. ARJUN I think that's a really nice way of putting it.

Speaker 1 • 20:44
Yeah, I think that whereas that's a very nice way of putting it. Whereas Gramsci is more concerned about society as a plane of competition among groups who are trying to claim their position at the helm of the state. Foucault is not concerned about that competition. Foucault is seen actually power much more as something, he calls it capillary that is diffuse among different people and that is really taken on by people themselves. So yes, I think that's a very nice way of putting it. Can you explain Timothy Mitchell and his ideas? So Timothy Mitchell's ideas are really the ideas of, as we talked about, the fetishism of the state. The idea that the state would somehow. The state is something that just exists in the world and that it doesn't come from somewhere. This is what fetishism means, which we'll talk about more after spring break. But fetishism is just the treatment of something as if it just exists in itself.

Speaker 1 • 21:52
Anthropologists and historians, many other social scientists would want to say, well, no, the state comes from somewhere and how we think of it, we have to be critical of how we think of it because we are also products of our historical moment and of our society. And so Timothy Mitchell says we often see the state as a kind of actor that is separate from the rest of society and that selectively intervenes in this thing that we call the economy, which is self governing. And he says all of these things could be different. Imagining the state as separate from the economy, as kind of selectively intervening in it. It's a particular idea about the state that has consequences that make certain modes of governance thinkable and other modes of governance not thinkable. So just kind of in an overarching simpler way. Right. The state itself is something that we, we should interrogate our assumptions about what this state is.

Speaker 1 • 22:55
And so Mitchell rejects this fetishism of the state. The treatment of the stage is just something that is and should not be interrogated. Then Mitchell is also interested in how we study the state. We study the state via its self representation, what it says it does. We study the state via its practices, what it actually does. Or we study the state via its effects, how people encounter the state. What happens when you go to mail a package, for example, at the post office? Or what happens when Seth Holmes, the anthropologists that we talked about last week, attempts to cross the US Mexico border? Right. So how citizens also encounter the state, and often in very piecemeal ways. They encounter agents of the state who sometimes may behave in unexpected ways or even disagree with one another. Very good question. Just going to answer quickly the difference between the Orient and Orientalism, because that was asked before we started recording.

Speaker 1 • 24:03
But the difference between the Orient and Orientalism. And Edward said the Orient is a category that was used in the nineteenth century to refer to a broad swath of the world which we would now call probably East Asia and the near east or the Middle East. And Edward said that this term which was used to identify a region, was part of a system of knowledge production that actually tells us more about the people who created the knowledge than about the region that the term supposedly describes. And this is Orientalism. So Orientalism is something that one can be accused of. One can be accused of being an Orientalist, which would basically mean that an Orientalist is in some ways ethnocentric, is not interested in seeing a particular, for example, Middle East. Edward Said, concerned about the Middle east in particular, he's Palestinian. Not interested in seeing the Middle east from the perspective of a Middle Easterner, but really is interested in seeing the Middle east as a kind of flip of the west, as having within it all of the things that the west is not.

Speaker 1 • 25:17
And so we talked about in class, right, that Orientalism is kind of what Edward Said accuses scholars of the Orient of doing, which is giving to the Middle east, for example, the characteristics that the west believes that it does not have. So, for example, you know, uncontrolled sexuality, you know, excess in kind of lasciviousness, excess extravagance. Also irrationality, mindlessness, chaos, a lack of order. So the things that the west would imagine itself as not having. Other questions, specific questions from the study guide. Darby, you had a very good question. I don't know. I don't know if I was recording. Until someone else asked the question. I'm just going to revisit. Also, Darby had a very good question about Gertzen Hurston, in broad strokes, to review Clifford Gertz, symbolic anthropologist interested in culture as a kind of mental category, or at the very least, anthropologists needed to, for Gertz, access culture as something that existed in people's minds.

Speaker 1 • 27:24
And so we see this very much with Raymond Carroll, someone who's writing in the same vein as Gertz, who's saying we need to understand French and American culture via the logics that French and American people bring to the same conversation, right, where they misunderstand one another and they, you know, realize that they don't attribute the same meanings to words or to silence or to discussion, et cetera. And Gertz is really interested in the. In the piece that we read, Notes on the Balinese On a Balinese Cockfight, he's interested in explaining what seems initially to be an incredibly irrational practice, which is the betting of excessive amounts of money on roosters that never seem to win and the kind of preening and care for roosters who are then set out to fight and are often torn limb from limb in these very bloody cock fights. With other roosters.

Speaker 1 • 28:25
And Gertz answers this kind of puzzle by saying, well, the Balinese cock fight does a few things, and the most important thing that it does is it reasserts kin relationships. It reaffirms relationships among people. And so the people who bet, who place bets on roosters don't bet on the rooster that they think is most likely to win. They bet on the rooster who is owned by their kin. And so kin relationships are reflected and also reinforced via these betting practices. And we talked about that in relation to contemporary American practices around football, right? Also a very risky endeavor, but one that we accept for various reasons. And when people support a team in American football, they don't necessarily support the team that has the best chances of winning. They support the team that they are somehow connected to, often via residents or via relationships with other people.

Speaker 1 • 29:29
And even when their team does really, really poorly, right? Keeps losing, people will often still support the team. And with Zora Neale Hurston, we talked about her as a student of Franz Boas, right? Early father of American anthropology, proponent of cultural relativism, seen a culture from the insider's point of view, not from the ethnocentric point of view. And Hurston went to Eatonville, Florida, central Florida, a black self governing town where she herself had grown up. And she documented folk songs. She also documented everyday life, right? People getting drunk, going out together, partying, going, having this thing called a tow party. And she wrote that all down. And she wrote that down in a way that attempted to capture black speech, something that some other members of the Harlem Renaissance really took issue with because they saw her as uplifting, a kind of form of speech and a kind of quote unquote black way of life that some other members of the Harlem Renaissance thought should not be uplifted.

Speaker 1 • 30:35
At the time, they said, we have plenty of negative representations of black American life. We need, we don't want to uplift the quote unquote, kind of unlettered, you know, partying, drunk part of black life. We actually, we want to uplift these other moments. And so they, they, they took issue with, with Hurston and with her project. And she had a falling out with quite a few people in the Harlem Renaissance, which we talked about in class. And would, it would be good to review. Can you go over this term, mutuality of being in the study guide? I'm glad that you asked about that. Yukun Sang. That's very good question. So mutuality of being is an idea from Marshall Sahlens, very famous anthropologist who died recently. And Sahlens is interested in kinship as a kind of. In kinship as rooted in this thing called mutuality of being. He has a lovely quote in which he says, let me see if I can find it here.

Speaker 1 • 31:44
It is right here, actually, kins, people, kinsmen are people who live each other's lives and die each other's death, deaths, to the extent they lead common lives, they partake of each other's sufferings and joys, sharing one another's experiences, even as they take responsibility and for. And feel the effects of each other's acts. And so what Sahlins is pointing to here is the kind of emotional or affective and also experiential aspect of kinship. Right. He's turning our gaze away from kinship as just something that is about blood relationships or by this thing that we could call biological proximity, and that is really about the deep attachments that people have to one another who then are like kin. Sometimes these people are kin or they are people who become, as we talked about the class before, we talked about sailing's chosen kin.

Speaker 1 • 32:46
And so. Right. He gives us this really lovely example of how when someone is your kin, when something good happens to them, you are happy that it happened to them. Right. Or it has an effect on you. At the very least, you share in it. It is also something that feels like it has happened to you. And. And when that person dies, it is also, it is right, a loss for you. It is a kind of death for you as well. And so Sailens is paying attention, Right. In the very term mutuality of being, to the kind of experiences that undergird what kinship means. Yeah, very good question. Other questions, I think I've answered all of the other earlier questions. Just in terms of how much depth you should go into to understand the readings. So we mentioned, right. Looking at how some of the challenging readings that we have had, readings and podcasts we've had, we should look at how we have discussed those together in lecture and section, but also pairing together, right.

Speaker 1 • 34:22
Your notes with the PowerPoints and with the readings themselves. We've highlighted together some of the most important passages and tried to restate them in plain language. You please go over the term cultural hegemony in the study guide. So cultural hegemony. So we spoke about this just a little bit before. Cultural hegemony is Anthony Gramsci's term. It is a term that refers to ideas that are promoted or spread by the ruling classes that justify. Gramsci tells us the position of power of the ruling classes. So standard language Ideology is a good example of this. It is an idea about language that proposes that there are right and wrong ways of speaking speaking and that people who don't know how to speak correctly are people who are somehow inferior or impaired. And so their distance from the center of power is there and justified people who then speak properly right with.

Speaker 1 • 35:29
With the ability to speak properly with a particular way of speaking really tied to where one was born, where one went to school, what one learned as a child. The kind of proper speech of a particular class or group of people then justifies, implicitly justifies their position in power. And so it's really in plainer words the dissemination of an ideology or set of ideas via civil society institutions like churches or the media schools that ideas that implicitly justify the ruling classes position as a ruling class. Gramsci says that this is always open to negotiation and competition. And so different ideas can be disseminated that are challenging different groups kind of position at the helm of the state. So the kind of hold over the state is never totally secure. But the standard language ideology is a good example of kind of set of ideas that implicitly prop up one group's position at the center of power and help explain other groups exclusion from the center of power.

Speaker 1 • 37:15
Other questions? We have just a few more minutes. So anything that. Don't be afraid to ask about anything that you weren't sure of or that would be helpful. Helpful to revisit. Message from a bit earlier. What is tomorrow's class content? So tomorrow we're talking about two readings which will not be on the final exam. I'm sorry, on the mid. On the midterm exam will definitely be on the final exam. But two readings on androcentrism and patriarchy. Two. Two really good readings. Some of my favorite readings of the semester. Any other questions? Okay. Was really is great to see all of you. I hope that was helpful. Any other questions? Please don't hesitate to reach out and I will see you in class tomorrow. No problem. I'm glad. I'm glad it was helpful. I'm glad. Any other questions? Don't hesitate to reach out and I'll see you all in class tomorrow.

